Toggle navigation   

[ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki](/Main_Page)

* [** Go ****]()
  * [Browse by Subject](/ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * [Encyclopedia](/Encyclopedia)
  
  * [Oral Histories](/Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * [First Hand Histories](/First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * [Landmarks/Milestones](/Landmarks)
  
  * [Archives](/Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * [Education](/ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * [Random page](/Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * [Help](/Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * [Contact us](/Special:Contact)
  
  * 
  * [Recent changes](/Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * [New pages](/Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* [** Actions ****]()
  * [View
    source](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Judith_Mills&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]")
  
  * [History](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Judith_Mills&action=history "Past revisions of this page [h]")
  
  * 
  * [Oral-History](/Oral-History:Judith_Mills)
  
  * [Discussion](/index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Judith_Mills&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page [t]")
  
  * 
* [** Tools ****]()
  * [What links
    here](/Special:WhatLinksHere/Oral-History:Judith_Mills "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]")
  
  * [Related
    changes](/Special:RecentChangesLinked/Oral-History:Judith_Mills "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]")
  
  * [Special
    pages](/Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages [q]")
  
  * [Printable
    version](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Judith_Mills&printable=yes "Printable version of this page [p]")
  
  * [Permanent
    link](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Judith_Mills&oldid=108569 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * [Page
    information](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Judith_Mills&action=info)
  
  * [Browse properties](/Special:Browse/Oral-2DHistory:Judith_Mills)
* [** Account ****](# "Account")
  * [Log
    in](/index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3AJudith+Mills)
  
  * 
  * [Request account](/Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Judith Mills

## About Judith Mills

Judith Mills was born in 1950 in Gateshead, UK. She attended Leeds
University where she majored in computing. After graduation Mills was
hired as a computer programmer for Hepworth's the Tailors. While her
children were young, she worked at several part-time positions, before
accepting a teaching position in 1982 at Wakefield College. She left
Wakefield in 1999 for position as a Systems Developer for General
Electric.

In this interview, Mills reflects on her career in computing. She also
talks about the different programs and languages she used, including
COBOL, and her experience with them. Mills talks about her family life
and her career and the struggle to balance them both.

## About the Interview

JUDITH MILLS: An Interview Conducted by Janet Abbate for the IEEE
History Center, 19 April 2001

Interview \# 612 for the IEEE History Center, The Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
the IEEE History Center Oral History Program, IEEE History Center at
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ
07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include identification of
the specific passages to be quoted, anticipated use of the passages, and
identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Judith Mills, an oral history conducted in 2001 by Janet Abbate, IEEE
History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

## Interview

INTERVIEW: Judith Mills\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: 19 April 2001\
PLACE: Judith Mills' office at General Electric Company (GEC), Leeds, UK

### Background and Education

**Abbate:**

Just to begin at the beginning: When were you born?

**Mills:**

1950\.

**Abbate:**

And where did you grow up?

**Mills:**

In Durham, which is the next county North to here. I was actually born
in Gateshead, so I’m a Geordie\! \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

I don’t know what that means.

**Mills:**

Over here, if you were born within so many miles of the River Tyne,
you’re a Geordie. And I was born right on the banks of the River Tyne,
so I’m a definite Geordie. \[laughs\]

**Abbate:**

Oh. That’s a good thing, I guess.

**Mills:**

Well—not really, no\! \[laughs\]

**Abbate:**

Oh well\! What did your parents do for a living?

**Mills:**

My mother was just a housewife—she says. My father was Deputy Director
of Education, so I suppose I was middle-class.

**Abbate:**

Did you have any brothers and sisters?

**Mills:**

I have an elder brother. He’s now a farmer.

We were both sort of brought up that education was the thing—and
certainly my mother had no qualifications, and she was very worried
always that if my father died, how would she cope? So she made sure that
I had a qualification to fall back on, just in case I ever needed to. I
don’t think she expected me to work, but . . .

**Abbate:**

Ah, interesting. But she conveyed that . . .

**Mills:**

It was definite that women had to get qualifications, just in case
something happened to their husbands once they were married. That was
sort of the atmosphere I was brought up in. So it was assumed I would go
to university, which I did.

**Abbate:**

Before you went, what type of schools did you go to?

**Mills:**

A grammar school. In those days we had what was called the Eleven Plus;
that was an exam you had when you were sort of 10, coming up 11\. If you
passed that, you went to a grammar school. So there was sort of one
grammar school in Durham, which brought in children from probably a
20-mile radius. You were the sort of elite, as it were. The second stage
was that there was a sort of an up-market “secondary modern,” they were
called, where if you sort of passed the first half but not the second
half of the Eleven Plus, you went there; and then, if you didn’t pass
either half, you went to the local secondary modern, where you were
taught, sort of a trade more than anything else. So the grammar school
was a very academic environment. The up-market secondary modern, if I
can put it like that \[laughs\], was sort of a halfway house, and
certainly there were feeds . . . I don’t know how much you know about
the British education system, certainly as it was in those days: we had
the Eleven Plus, and then, at about 15 or 16, one did your O Levels;
then you went on to do A Levels afterwards. So there was a feed between
the sort of secondary modern to the sixth form of the grammar school, if
those people had done well enough. But as I say, it was the academic
route that was—that I went to.

**Abbate:**

So you went directly to the grammar school.

**Mills:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

Was that all girls, or mixed?

**Mills:**

It was all girls in those days, yes. “Never the twain shall meet” with a
boy\! \[laughs\]

**Abbate:**

And did you have an interest in either math or science when you were in
school?

**Mills:**

Not particularly. I mean, I did sciences, but I think . . . I skipped a
year. You would normally do three years and then choose your O Level
topics, and we did two years and then chose our O Level topics, so we
skipped a year somewhere. It was an experiment, which I’m not sure was a
good idea or not. And basically, being an all-girls’ school, the choice
of O Level was quite limited, and I could choose either biology and art,
or physics and chemistry. Now, seeing as I’d had one term of biology,
one term of physics, and one term of chemistry, I didn’t really know
what they were all about—but I know I can’t draw\! \[laughs.\] So I went
down the science route.

**Abbate:**

So you didn’t even have maths?

**Mills:**

Oh yes\! At O Level, certainly the school I went to, we did French,
Latin, history, geography, English language, English literature, maths;
they were the standard, and everybody had to do those.

**Abbate:**

So the optional . . .

**Mills:**

The optional was either biology and art, or physics and chemistry. So I
chose physics and chemistry. Then when I came to A Level—I’m not really
too sure why I chose them, but I chose maths, physics, and chemistry,
which seemed to go quite well together. Being an all-girls’ school, I
didn’t actually have the option of double maths. When I went to choose a
university course, at first I thought, “Oh, I’ll do maths\!” I’m glad I
didn’t now, but I thought at the time I would; and they said, “Oh,
you’ve only got single maths; you can’t do it.” So it had to be maths
and something, and at this point I realized I didn’t particularly like
physics, and I didn’t particularly like chemistry, and I didn’t fancy
statistics; so I thought, “Oh\! Computing\!” \[laughs.\] I had no idea
what computing was\! So I did maths and computing at university.

**Abbate:**

When was this?

**Mills:**

I started university in ‘67\.

**Abbate:**

So they already had computing as a . . .

**Mills:**

Yes, I was the second year. There was—I think the course started in
1966, and I was the second year of this course. But it was very much an
unknown; I had no idea what it was. But it sort of was the only choice
that seemed sensible.

**Abbate:**

But it seemed more interesting than . . .

**Mills:**

. . . physics or chemistry, yes.

**Abbate:**

Was that because you had some idea about computers, or it was just that
. . .

**Mills:**

No. I think I’d actually seen one computer when we went on a visit, a
school visit somewhere, and they showed us a little bit of machine code,
which just went completely over my head. So I . . . I mean, no, I didn’t
anything about computing; but I knew enough to know that I didn’t fancy
either physics or chemistry or statistics, which were my other options
to go with the maths that I quite liked at that point. So . . .

**Abbate:**

You went for the devil you didn’t know.

**Mills:**

That’s right\! \[laughs.\] So as I say, it’s really because I can’t draw
that I’m in computing.

**Abbate:**

This was at Leeds University?

**Mills:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

Were there other women in the computing course?

**Mills:**

Yes: roughly about 50 percent.

**Abbate:**

Really\!

**Mills:**

In fact I was speaking to one of my lecturers only a few years ago, and
he was saying that there are no women at all doing computing now. But .
. .

**Abbate:**

So it’s gone down from the mid-’60s.

**Mills:**

It’s gone down, yes.

**Abbate:**

Why do you suppose it was so high?

**Mills:**

I think it was because it was unknown and it wasn’t then thought of as
being a boys’ topic. I think more and more, with the advent particularly
of PCs and computer games, computing is thought of as being a boys’
hobby—you know, playing on computer games. Therefore, the subject of
computing is thought of as being a boys’ subject.

But interestingly enough, we’ve got quite a few females in our systems
department—she says, desperately trying to count them up\! \[laughs.\]
We’re probably about a third, something like that? And everywhere I’ve
worked, certainly in education, there’s a heck of a lot of women in
computing; but it seems that the university courses—and even the courses
I taught at a college—there are very few. So where they come, I’m not
quite sure.

**Abbate:**

That’s a good question\! I’ll try and get the answer to that.

All right, so you did computers and maths, and so that would be the
first time you actually used a computer?

**Mills:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

And what was that like?

**Mills:**

I’m not sure how to answer, “What was it like?” It was an Elliott 903\.
We had two computers at university, an Elliott 903 and a KDF 9\.

**Abbate:**

Was that English Electric?

**Mills:**

Now you’re asking, I have no idea\!

**Abbate:**

I can find that out.

**Mills:**

The KDF 9 was definitely a very up-market computer for the time, and it
actually had several users logged on, we could actually log on to it;
whereas the Elliott 903 was one that as students we were allowed to
operate ourselves, and it had paper tape, and we had to toggle in the
bootstrap\! \[laughs.\] Didn’t know what I was doing at the time\! I
knew you had to go through this procedure, and I had no idea what it was
actually doing—but I knew to do this, you know, to actually get the
machine up and running.

**Abbate:**

So that when you started out, they just tossed you in there and said,
“Okay, you have to do this and this and this, and then . . . “

**Mills:**

Yes. I mean, there was a set of instructions up on the wall, you know,
“To load the machine, do this, then that, then that.” So you just sort
of followed it, parrot-fashion, and got the machine up and running.

**Abbate:**

Were you operating the machines for other people, or just for
yourselves?

**Mills:**

Just for ourselves. But as I say, the only one we were allowed to use at
all, or use hands-on, was the Elliott 903\. The KDF 9 we used to just
log on and use it as a terminal, which in those days was very advanced.
And, the operating system was written by one of the lecturers there,
Dave Holdsworth, and he certainly was way ahead of his time in how he
designed it, and things like that.

**Abbate:**

So he did the time-sharing system.

**Mills:**

Yes. ELDON 2, I seem to remember it was called: named after the local
pub\! \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

Did you have a particular area of computing that you were interested in
at university? I don’t know what the course was like . . .

**Mills:**

We did some programming; we learned ALGOL, which I can’t remember
anything about now. It certainly wasn’t written in any structured
format, because I remember having GOTOs floating around all over the
place\! I don’t really think I actually understood what I was doing. I
don’t know if I ought to say this: I remember my very first program that
I wrote there, and we had to enter the number N, and then enter N
numbers, and total them up. And I’d handed in this program, and it had
come out with a message saying, “Calling for more data.” And I didn’t
realize at the time that program hadn’t actually executed properly and
come to the end and printed a total out; that it was wanting more
numbers to feed in, because I hadn’t put N numbers in there. So, I can’t
say that I actually—looking back, did I really understand what I was
doing? I don’t think so\! \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

Well, it was only your first one\!

**Mills:**

Yes, but you’d have thought I would have realized that I hadn’t actually
produced a total—but I didn’t\! So I suppose students haven’t changed
all that much, have they. \[laughs\]

We did a lot of work on operating systems and syntax and semantics and
things like that. I can’t really remember what else.

**Abbate:**

Did they expect you to go work for computer companies? Or do you have
any idea where—what they thought they were training you for?

**Mills:**

I don’t think they thought they were training, as such. I suspect that
in those days, you were there to—how do I phrase this?—you were there to
get an education; whether that education was at all relevant to the
outside world (which it wasn’t\!) I don’t think, you know, entered their
mind at all. I think education’s moved on a lot now, and you know,
people are trained to be useful to industry, whereas in those days they
weren’t. All the degree meant was that you had a certain level of
intelligence and a certain level of being able to recap and regurgitate
on paper what you’d been taught—without, I really believe, actually
understanding it\!

**Abbate:**

So even in computing, which seems so hands-on, it was at a more abstract
level?

**Mills:**

Yes, definitely. So the only practical work we ever did was writing
programs, and they weren’t very many, you know; programming was only one
little small part of the course. The only things I can really remember
are writing this program, and also learning about syntax and
semantics—insomuch as we had the two phrases, “The peanut ate the
elephant,” and “The elephant ate the peanut”; and “Time flies like an
arrow,” and “Time flies like an apple\!” \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

Right.

**Mills:**

You’ve obviously heard it before as well. Those four sentences, and my
program that didn’t work—seriously, are the only things I can remember
of my university course\!

Oh, we learned a lot about number systems: binary, octal, hexadecimal,
things like that . . .

**Abbate:**

Were you—You said you were using ALGOL; were you also using binary, or
machine code, assembler?

**Mills:**

Yes. Yes, we were. But whether it was a genuine one, or whether it was .
. . It was SIR, which I think was a made-up academic one. And, so it
taught you the concepts without getting into any of the complexities. So
yes, we did some.

**Abbate:**

Was there any hardware? Or was it just the software side?

**Mills:**

I honestly can’t remember.

**Abbate:**

You weren’t soldering things together?

**Mills:**

Oh no\! Definitely not. Nothing like that. If we had done anything on
hardware, which presumably we did, it would just be sort of, “This is an
exchangeable floppy disk,” and explaining how the heads move, and the
concepts of cylinders and things like that. But, we wouldn’t have done
that in 1970, because I don’t think I came across disks until much
later—about ‘73?—she says, desperately trying to remember\!
\[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

Well that’s interesting. I should get the curriculum for that.

**Mills:**

Well they probably do have it, still.

**Abbate:**

Yes, probably the university has it somewhere.

**Mills:**

Well, the contact that—I know he’s still there—will be Dave Holdsworth.

**Abbate:**

. . . who actually wrote that?

**Mills:**

He was the man who designed ELDON 2\. And, he’s the lecturer I—I used to
see him occasionally when we went to the BCS Computer Challenge. So I’d
say certainly he’s still at Leeds University, and you know, if anybody
can find it, he’d be able to.

But—it’s a complete blank\! Did I really spend three years there?
\[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

What happened when you finished?

**Mills:**

I got married\! I finished in the sort of June-July time, got married in
the July, and then thought, “Oh\! I’d better get a job\!” Now, my
husband was still at Leeds University; he went on to do an M.Sc. in
computing.

\[Remembering something else about the course:\] Oh\! We did a lot about
numerical analysis—which again went completely over my head\! But I only
say that because he specialized in numerical analysis when he was doing
his M.Sc., because he did maths as a first course.

So I had to stay somewhere in Leeds, so I thought at first of just sort
of temping, and going in as a clerk somewhere; and I got an interview at
Hepworth the Tailors for a clerk’s position, and I thought, “Do I put
down that I’ve got a degree?” And I thought, “Well if I do, they might
think I’m over-qualified; but there again, you know, I’d better tell the
truth.” And they looked at my C.V. that I filled in and said, “Why are
you applying for a job as a temporary clerk here, rather than a
programmer?” I said, “Well, I’m hoping to get into computing via the
back door”—which was just something that came off the tip of my head\!
And they immediately took me along for an interview, and I got a job; so
that was really the first computing job I’d applied for. And that was
Hepworth’s the Tailors, just up the road.

### Programming for Hepworth's the Tailors, Using COBOL

**Abbate:**

And they were eager to have programmers?

**Mills:**

Yes, yes.

**Abbate:**

What kind of work did they want you to do?

**Mills:**

It was programming in COBOL, mainly. We did some assembler programming,
but the majority of it was on COBOL, to do with, I suppose,
financial-type systems, stock control, warehousing, credit control, that
sort of thing.

**Abbate:**

Did you already know COBOL?

**Mills:**

Nope. I was there a week, and then they sent me off for three weeks of
training. The first week was—I’m up to things I can remember now\!—the
first week was sort of a general introduction to computing: in a week,
covered my university course. Then we did two weeks of COBOL training,
and I can remember writing the notes and converting everything to ALGOL.
You know: “‘Move X to Y’ is equivalent to ‘Y:=X;’”—because by then I
knew the ALGOL; it was a way of sort of equating the same sort of
information, so I’d know what it was. I think I’d have to do it the
other way around, now\!

And then as I say, I came back and started working as a programmer.
Again, I can remember my first program I wrote. And it worked\!
\[laughter.\] But it wasn’t very efficiently written, as I discovered
when I came across it sort of, like two years later on. I thought, “Who
on earth wrote this? Oh god, you did\! Change the name on the author\!”

**Abbate:**

What sort of machines were you working on at that point?

**Mills:**

They had two machines when I first started: They had an Elliott 803,
which I never actually worked on, but which I believed had magnetic film
as its storage device; and then there was a Honeywell 1200, which at
that time just had four tape drives, but they soon got disks, I think
probably one or two exchangeable disk packs, which was definitely
state-of-the-art at the time. But it was, you know, rapidly progressing
at this point, the computing.

**Abbate:**

How long were you there?

**Mills:**

Well, 1970 to ‘75\. And then I stopped work to have my first child. And
then I went back part-time afterwards. I used to sort of work from home,
and go in two mornings a week, so I did twenty hours for them, of which
I did two mornings in—about eight hours—and the rest of the time at
home, which was rather nice.

**Abbate:**

Now, how did you do it at home? Was that at a terminal, or on paper?

**Mills:**

On paper. Often what they would do, because I could sit quietly, they’d
give me the sort of the problems—you know that sometimes you’ve got a
problem and you need to just go somewhere quiet and sit down and think
about it and debug it. Well, they often gave me the big problems to take
home, and it was— Sometimes, you know, you could sit down: “Oh yeah,
that’s straightforward\!”—and do what everybody else would have done in
ten hours in about an hour\! \[laughs.\] Just because you had quiet, and
there were no interruptions, and things like that. So sometimes I would
write the coding at home—we were still writing upon sort of coding
sheets, and there would be punch-girls to type it in; and sometimes it
was sort of the debugging. It was quite interesting working part-time.

**Abbate:**

So that worked out well for you?

**Mills:**

Very good, yes.

No, between actually ‘75 and ‘82 . . . In ‘75 I left Hepworth’s; ‘82 I
started working at Wakefield College, so in between them, as well as
having two children, I also did various part-time work. I worked
part-time at what was then Leeds Polytechnic, now Leeds Metropolitan
University; I did some teaching courses there. I did some at Kitson
College. I did some work for B/Tec—or Bec/Tec as they were then—which is
one of the awarding bodies, an academic awarding body, so I did some
work on their administration system. Again, that was a group of women,
really. I also worked briefly for F International.

**Abbate:**

Wow\! I’m talking to Steve \[Stephanie\] Shirley tomorrow.

**Mills:**

Right\!

I worked on a—is it Swedish system? Again it was sort of working from
home, and then you’d go occasionally to a site to do some testing. The
majority of the work was at home.

I also . . . where else did I work? Oh, I did sort of one or two
consultancy things. So there was numerous sort of part-time jobs from as
little as three hours a week to up to twenty hours a week, in between
there. I actually have difficulty remember when I did what\!

**Abbate:**

So was it easy to find work?

**Mills:**

Fairly easy, yes. I think as long as you kept reasonably up-to-date—and
of course, being that—my husband being in the university, he had lots of
sort of contacts in the academic world, so I could always get part-time
teaching jobs. But there was also, as I say: I never really stopped
working, other than the times when my actually maternity allowance paid
me some money—you know, sort of six weeks before to six weeks after (or
something) the birth. That was the only time I really didn’t have any
work. But it varied, and I moved on from job to job. But yes, it was
reasonably easy, I think, to find.

### Starting to Teach

**Abbate:**

So you had contacts, and once you’d done some work, you could . . .

How did you start teaching?

**Mills:**

Well, I always intended, I think, to go teaching when the kids were, you
know, going to school, because at that time, you got the long summer
holidays. You also . . . Your hours were sort of flexible: so okay, some
days you were home in time to pick the kids up from school; not every
day, because other days I’d work late, but it seemed to be the one
full-time job that I could do to fit in with the children. So I think
I’d always assumed I was going to go teaching somewhere, and I just
happened to see an advert in the paper—actually in hospital, when my son
broke his arm, but that’s another story—at Wakefield College, which was
one of our local colleges, and I thought, “Yes\! This is the job for
me\! There it is in the paper, just when I was about to start looking
for it”—and applied, and got it. So I went to Wakefield, and I was there
for many years: too long, looking back\! \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

What was that like?

**Mills:**

At the beginning, when I first started, to be quite honest, it was a
cushy number. The class sizes were fairly small—it was a post-16 college
. . . The class sizes were fairly small; there wasn’t the amount of
administration to do that there is in education now—you’re nodding; you
know what I’m talking about—and the work load wasn’t that bad at all.
You could sort of prepare, mark, et cetera, really within the working
day. So, yes, in those days it was a really nice job. You got long, hot
summer holidays, et cetera—and I took them.

But then things started to change, and the work—you know, the class
sizes—went up. The number of classes you took per week went up. The
amount of administration you did went up. Also, as I was moving up the
ladder, as it were, I got more and more administrative jobs to do, and
it just got to the point where it just got ridiculous. In fact, it got
so bad that that’s why I left.

**Abbate:**

In terms of the courses you taught, did you just get to teach what you
wanted? Or was there a set curriculum?

**Mills:**

I’m smiling, because I was the time-tabler, so I always got to teach
what I . . . \[laughs\] The first thing that went onto the time table
when I was doing it was what I wanted to teach—so yes\!

But also there was . . . I mean, I taught a lot of A Level, and A Level
had a standard curriculum, so I couldn’t teach what I wanted; you know,
within that course I had to teach to the curriculum. But it didn’t
change very rapidly, so in some ways A Level was a very nice course to
teach, because once you’d got your notes prepared, they lasted quite
well. Other subjects and other people had a lot more to do; and in
particular, if you’re teaching a software package—you know, how to use
Word or WordPerfect or whatever—you’d just get the notes done and then
they’d move, you know, from Wordstar to Wordperfect to Word, and all the
notes that you prepared had to be updated. So that was very hard on a
lot of people teaching that sort of thing.

**Abbate:**

When did they start having an A Level in computing?

**Mills:**

1975, I think? Yes. And at that time it was a very mathematical—there
were a lot of sort of numerical analysis–t¬ype questions on it, and
things like that. And then it gradually moved, over the years; you know,
the numerical analysis came off, and there was more on operating systems
and things put on. But the syllabus changed fairly slowly. It wasn’t,
you know, a brand new syllabus and throw out all of your notes one year;
it was just sort of a slow adapt-up. But I’m sure it was \[established\]
long before I started teaching, anyway.

**Abbate:**

That seems quite early.

**Mills:**

And it was the A.E.B., as it used to be; the Associated Examining Board,
I think, was the first one who did an A Level computing. But it was
definitely a sort of topic to go with the maths. So you could do double
maths and computing, or double maths, physics, and computing—so again,
it was very scientific.

**Abbate:**

So you wouldn’t do art, biology, and computing.

**Mills:**

No, not in those days.

**Abbate:**

Were you able to shape the curriculum in other ways? Were there topics
you thought should be taught and you wanted to bring in?

**Mills:**

If we think it . . . The A Level, no; you couldn’t really influence what
was on that at all. When it was the B/Tec, which was another awarding
body, which did—now, what were they called in those days? National
Diploma and Higher National Diploma, they were called, and National
Certificate. To a certain extent, yes, you could. There would be . . .
The syllabus was center-devised, and there would be guidelines—you know,
“We expect you to have 20 modules, 15 of which must be these modules,
but the remaining 5 you can design yourself.” So yes, you could put the
specialisms in, but once that course was designed, it would go for
approval, and then you could only change it very slightly, in
conjunction with your external examiner or moderator, until you
resubmitted. So, some courses, yes, you could fiddle with them slightly;
other courses, no, it was definitely prescribed by an outside body what
you taught.

**Abbate:**

And did you have a specialty?

**Mills:**

Programming. I think\! \[laughs.\] I certainly taught a lot of
programming. Probably just, as I say, because I was the time-tabler, and
I thought, “Oh\! Yes, we’ll do this\!” So I taught virtually all the A
Level, which was quite a bit of theory as well, but I’d teach them
programming on A Level, because they had to do a project, so they had to
have the practical skills; and I’d teach programming on one or two of
the other modules, so . . .

But, to be fair—I’m sounding as though I did this deliberately for me.
You would also try to put people on as minimum number of topics as
possible, so that perhaps if somebody was teaching word processing,
you’d put them on a lot of word processing courses, so that hopefully
they’d get the notes and there wouldn’t be too much of a workload. But
it’s certain that life in colleges, in particular, got very, very
difficult. I’m not the only one that left. In fact, of the “old school,”
as it were, we’ve all left, I think, now, and all gone back to work in
industry.

**Abbate:**

Did you see changes in the types of students you got?

**Mills:**

Yes, definitely. I’m sounding old here\! I think everybody was
\[laughs\]—I’m sure they got less intelligent as they went on\! I think
that was partially due to the college I was at as well, and the way it
fitted into the local environment. When I first went there in 1982, it
was the only place in the district that did the A Levels, so the
students came from all the schools into Wakefield College to do A
Levels. And then more and more schools got their own sixth form and did
their A Levels; so to a large extent, over the years, the schools would
keep the better students, and only the worse ones were coming into the
college. The ones that weren’t really encouraged to stay at the schools
came into the college. So I think that had some effect, and I think
also, at that time, there was a lack of employment in the area that
meant that more people were staying on at school, not because they were
interested particularly, but because they hadn’t got a job, and it
seemed a sensible thing to do to perhaps get some more qualifications.
So people who historically would have gone out and got a job were
staying on in education, and I think bringing the level down. So I think
it was economic/environment, rather than just the intelligence of the
students\! \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

And I guess you were getting more students, so the class sizes were
going up?

**Mills:**

Yes. Bigger classes, so you weren’t able to give them the individual
attention. I don’t know, maybe it was me getting old, but they didn’t
seem to have the dedication that the students that I first started to
take did. When I first started, if you set them some homework, it would
always be done. Later on, if you set them some homework, you’d be going
around chasing them for it for weeks afterwards. And it wasn’t just me
that found this. I think everybody found the same, that the dedication
of the students—whether that was because they weren’t that interested,
or whatever; or maybe there was more work handed out to them; I’m not
sure—but it became more and more difficult motivating the students as
well.

**Abbate:**

Do you think they were more sort of job-oriented rather than doing it
for intellectual interest at that point?

**Mills:**

Yes. And if they didn’t see it as being relevant to the job, then they
weren’t particularly interested, so . . .

### Working for General Electric

**Abbate:**

So you got out\!

**Mills:**

I got out.

**Abbate:**

When was that?

**Mills:**

January—January ‘99 I started here. Is that right? Yes. Yes.

**Abbate:**

Here at General Electric.

**Mills:**

Yes.

And again, it was just one of those coincidences\! \[laughs.\] Had a
disagreement with my boss one day, stormed out of the office, opened up
Computing, which was something I never looked at. Big, full-page advert:
“COBOL Programmers, Leeds.” I thought, “Yes\!” \[laughs.\] Phoned up,
talked to the woman at the agency; she said, “Yeah, well send us your
C.V.” And at this point I don’t think I was really thinking of leaving,
so I went home that night, wrote a C.V. out—because it had been years
since I’d updated it—sent it off. Got a first interview. I thought,
“Right\!” So, I went up to my boss: “Oh, I’ve got an interview for a
job.” Just really to see her face, you know? And she said, “Oh, all
right, okay.” So I went off for this interview, and I don’t think I was
really bothered about the job. Anyway, got a second interview. So I
thought, “Oh\!” And I was pleased to get an interview, because I’d been
so long out of the commercial environment; I was even more pleased to
get a second interview. And then I got the job, and I thought, “Yes\! Go
for it\!” It’s the best thing I’ve ever done.

**Abbate:**

What work are you doing here?

**Mills:**

I think my official title is Systems Developer. The job I applied for
said definitely “COBOL programmer.” I do some programming in COBOL; I do
some programming in Access and VB \[Visual Basic\] and work as a systems
analyst. At the moment I’m the IT lead on a rewrite of a global payments
process, where we pay any currency in any country as cheaply as
possible. It’s actually extremely complicated, and I won’t bore you with
how we do it\! \[laughs.\]

But we have a process in at the moment that’s basically—it’s at breaking
point—it can’t take any volume because it’s so manually intensive in
various places, so we’re also . . . It has a piece of software, in that
it’s part of a package that we use that is not exactly Euro-compliant.
It’s got so many bandages on it at the moment to limp it through that we
just said, “Enough’s enough; we’ll rewrite this completely from
scratch.” So it’s a big project. Probably—well, stage one we’re aiming
to get in June the 30th, and there’s stage two, three, and four after
that; so that’ll probably be another 18 months, I would think, before
it’s all up and running properly.

**Abbate:**

Do you have to fit in with deadlines to . . . Well, now I can’t remember
if the U.K. is going to convert to the Euro or not, actually.

**Mills:**

No, we’re not. Not at the moment\!

**Abbate:**

Not at the moment, okay.

**Mills:**

The official line is “no\!”

**Abbate:**

So you’re not facing that kind of deadline, necessarily?

**Mills:**

Well, we are, because it’s a pan-European office here, and we have
businesses dotted—basically what we do here is pay invoices on behalf of
other GE businesses. At the moment, throughout Europe, but in the future
we’ll be taking on the Far East as well, running from here. So Euro does
affect us enormously.

**Abbate:**

Isn’t that phasing in next January or something? I don’t remember the
deadlines.

**Mills:**

It has been phasing in for a while.

**Abbate:**

But the actual—Are they going to have actual paper Euros?

**Mills:**

Yes\! But it’s more to do with how the banking systems are phasing into
it, and some of the complications we have in there. Because, say if you
have a French bank account: If you pay French francs, it depends how
your bank account is denominated as to whether they report in French
francs or report in Euros. So you—if it’s a Euro bank account within
France, you pay something in French francs—that’s fine—but it will
report on your statement in Euros; and all the bank reconciliation, the
fact you’ve paid so many French francs, and on your statement it’s so
many Euros . . . So that causes problems, until it’s all in—and
everything’s in Euros. We’ve got a lot of transition problems.

**Abbate:**

It sounds challenging\! \[laughter.\]

**Mills:**

I won’t tell you about Deutschebank\! \[laughs\]

**Abbate:**

You’re trying to coordinate this team; is this the first time you’ve
been in charge of a big project, or had you done that earlier?

**Mills:**

Yes and no. I mean, I’ve been in charge of projects before, when I used
to work out in industry in the past. I’ve also been in charge of people
before, in education. This is the first time I’ve been in charge of
people and a project in the commercial environment. I work—I have a
contractor working with me that comes over from Mexico—GE Global—and
it’s really only him and me that’s working in terms of the systems.
But because I’ve been working on this global payment process for quite
some time, I know a lot of background knowledge, so I’m also able to put
a user interface in there. So often, instead of the user giving me the
spec, I say, “This is what we’re going to do,” write my own spec, and
say to the user, “Now this is how it should be; you check it off.”—Which
is what I’m upstairs doing at the moment\!

**Abbate:**

So you’re really doing management and high-level design as well as . . .

**Mills:**

. . . as well as detailed; yes. Jack of all trades. \[laughs\] Is that a
new expression for you?

**Abbate:**

Jane of all trades, maybe.

**Mills:**

Yes, I mean we always say “Jack,” don’t we? \[laughter.\]

**Abbate:**

And you said there’s quite a few women here, in computing?

**Mills:**

Actually, there’s really only me, Nivea (who is Brazilian), and Karen.
Yes, because we did have Tracy and Fiona, but they’ve recently left, so
there’s only—we’ve only now got three women, out of a team of about 14,
something like that. Now, I know Nivea was a programmer over in Brazil
before she came here, and then she started working downstairs in A.P.,
sort of data entry and things like that in customer inquiries, because
she could speak Portuguese. And then they found out upstairs that she’d
actually got programming experience, and moved her upstairs\! I’m not
sure of Karen’s background at all—other than she’s been here a long
time. She only works four days a week, because she’s got a little girl,
so she has one day off to sort of get everything sorted out, house-wise.

**Abbate:**

Do you think programming still accommodates working mothers in terms of
flexible hours or working at home?

**Mills:**

Yes\! Certainly here. I would have no problem from working at home. If I
was to—In fact, there are moves afoot for us to be able to work at home,
full stop. There are legal implications of that, which have to be sorted
out, because you’ve got to have your . . . to make sure that your office
environment is—you know, your home environment is suitable for health
and safety purposes, and things like that\!

**Abbate:**

I didn’t know that.

**Mills:**

\[laughs.\] Well, neither did we, until we looked at it. Because
obviously, if you’re working full-time from home, then GE has to have
some sort of responsibility to make sure that you’ve got an adequate
desk and, you know, the lighting’s correct, and you’ve got your correct
chair, and things like that. Otherwise they’d be liable if you had, you
know, back problems, from sitting in the wrong place.

**Abbate:**

Even if you—even if it was your idea to work at home?

**Mills:**

Mmm-hmm. So that this—our working full-time at home—is held up in this
sort of legal loop. But the odd day—if there was something like that the
gas man was calling or something—my boss would have no problems with me
saying, “I’m working at home.” I mean, I can dial in; I’ve got my mobile
phone—company mobile phone—should anybody need me while I’m, you know,
logged on, or whatever. So yes, we can work from home. I tend not to,
because I like to come in to work, just to sort of chat to people\! But
I know quite a few people do work from home, and certainly—I don’t know
if you knew, recently we had a petrol crisis?

**Abbate:**

I don’t think I knew that.

**Mills:**

Oh, there were all sorts of petrol protests going on over here, probably
about three, four months ago now? I can’t actually remember. And
arrangements were made for us to be able to work at home should we run
out of petrol.

**Abbate:**

Ah.

**Mills:**

So yes, the company says, “No problem.” And I certainly—My official
hours of work are nine to five; I tend to work sort of eight till four,
just so that I come in early, miss the traffic, and go home early and
miss the traffic. And, you know, my boss has no problems with that
whatsoever. He’s fairly laid-back, I think.

### Balancing Work and Family Responsibilities

**Abbate:**

Has it ever been an issue for you, balancing work and family
responsibilities?

**Mills:**

I’m probably luckier than most, because my husband’s in education, and I
think they have a fairly flexible approach. Also, my kids have been
remarkably healthy. But I have been worried, “How on earth am I going to
. . .”—you know, if the kids are ill or whatever. But no, we’ve always
managed to sort of juggle two jobs, as it were, when they were smaller;
so that if I had to work late, Alan made sure he was home early, and
things like that. I mean, we’ve often passed in the drive, you know:
“Hello\! See you later on\!” \[laughs.\] But I think I was very lucky,
insomuch that he was in education as well and could be much more
flexible. I don’t think I’d be anywhere near as lucky now if we were
both in education. Certainly . . .

\[TAPE 1, SIDE 2\]

**Abbate:**

So you were juggling . . .

**Mills:**

I don’t think it would be anywhere near as easy to juggle like I did in
the past now, because education has changed. You know, given the choice
now, I would not go into education when my children went to school; I
would go into a commercial place, because I think they’re more flexible
than education is.

**Abbate:**

How old are your kids?

**Mills:**

Now? Let me see. Rachel was born in ‘75, so she’ll be what, 26? She’s a
solicitor in London. Ian is—he was born in ‘77, so he’ll be what? Coming
up 24\. And he’s a trainee actuary in London. So they’re both down
South.

**Abbate:**

But not in computing.

**Mills:**

Nope\!

**Abbate:**

With both parents in computing, they decided that was too much?

**Mills:**

Well, I think at the time it was both parents in education. My husband
also has a law degree that he did as a part-time thing, so I think
Rachel picked up her interest in law from him. And Ian is definitely
very mathematical; and Alan had always said that he wanted, when he was
sort of 20, to be an actuary, so Ian, I think, has gone into that\!

**Abbate:**

How interesting\!

**Mills:**

So, it’s, I think in both cases, Alan’s sort of frustrated—my husband’s
frustrated ambitions, as it were, that they’ve taken up\! \[laughter.\]

**Abbate:**

I hope that works well for them.

**Mills:**

Well they’re both quite well-paid, so . . .

### Being a Woman in the Field

**Abbate:**

Have you ever felt that, as a woman, you encountered workplace
discrimination in terms of attitudes, salaries, promotion, anything like
that?

**Mills:**

Yes. Definitely. I know when I first started work—you know, from ‘70 to
‘75—I was paid substantially less than the men in the department.

**Abbate:**

Was there an official scale for women? Or was it just implicit?

**Mills:**

No. It was . . . There were no scales for anybody. You were paid what
they thought they could get away with. I don’t even think there was an
Equal Pay Act in those days, actually. And definitely the women in the
department were paid less. I mean, nobody would actually say, “I am on
such-and-such an amount,” but from comments that people made and things
like that, you knew you were on a lot less than the men.

They also had—It was a very sort of hierarchical structure in those
days, that there were Executives, Senior Executives, Senior Staff,
Staff, weekly-paid, monthly-paid Staff, hourly-paid Staff—you know, et
cetera. I became the first female Senior Staff Member—which caused all
sorts of problems, because as a senior Staff Member, I was allowed a
free suit at Christmas\! \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

Really\! Did you take them up on that?

**Mills:**

My husband did\! \[laughs.\] And I was allowed 33% off in all the men’s
clothing shops, for myself—and only 15% for relatives. And I thought,
“Well, this is no good, because I can’t buy anything for myself in
these shops\!” So, I was—I think I was probably very much a rebel in
those days, and got it sorted out that female at Senior Staff could get
a third off for a nominated male relative\! \[laughter.\]

So actually my husband had a collection of suits in those days\!
\[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

Interesting perk.

Were you managing people at that point?

**Mills:**

At that time, no, no. No, definitely not.

### Experiencing Sexual Discrimination

**Mills:**

I also came across discrimination, I suppose, in education. Not so much
in pay, because they had recognized pay scales, and you plodded your way
up. I think there was discrimination early on about promotion, but this
was before I was at the stage where I would be promoted. But it
seemed—it seemed, looking in, that the men got promoted, whereas the
women didn’t. But as I say, it didn’t directly affect me, because I
wasn’t at that stage. And by the time I got to the stage where I was
going to be promoted—would have been promoted—they’d done some sort of
reorganization, so I plodded up anyway.

I also came across sexual discrimination I’m sure you want to know
about. \[laughs.\] Get on the interesting stuff\! Not horrendous, but
definitely sort of comments . . . I know my bosses used to often come up
and sort of massage my shoulders, and things like that—so I used to
quick elbow him\!

**Abbate:**

This was at the tailor?

**Mills:**

No, this was at the college.

**Abbate:**

At the college\!

**Mills:**

Yes.

But I think things were—you expected it, much more than nowadays. I
don’t think any . . . You know, I’m sure my husband would never dream
of going up and massaging the shoulders of one of his female members of
staff\! It would definitely be a no-no\! \[laughs.\] Whereas in those
days, I’m sure it was—if not expected, much more—I don’t want to say
“acceptable,” because that sounds as though you enjoyed it, but . . .

**Abbate:**

You sort of shrugged it off.

**Mills:**

Yes. It wasn’t the sort of thing that you would have complained about.
It was assumed that it would happen and you would in some way show your
displeasure, rather than complain. Whereas now you’d definitely complain
if something like that happened and you didn’t like it.

So it wasn’t sort of downright discrimination, but it was—it was there
in the background. And there were definitely the sexist jokes, and the
nude calendars were around, and things like that.

**Abbate:**

At the college?

**Mills:**

Yes. Oh yes.

**Abbate:**

I mean, it seems like that would affect the female students as well. Or
were the pictures only in . . . ?

**Mills:**

They’d sort of be in the staff rooms and things like that, yes. I mean I
don’t think anybody would dare put a nude picture, a nude female
picture, up here. It would just . . . People would jump on them these
days.

**Abbate:**

It’s a different world.

**Mills:**

It is.

**Abbate:**

Did they have those nude computer printout things? Line-printer art?

**Mills:**

I think that’s a dismissable offense, isn’t it? \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

But I mean back in the . . .

**Mills:**

Oh, in those days\! Not really, I don’t think, no. I mean, we’d get porn
off the Internet posted up, but that would be the students doing it, so
you’d have to go around taking it off, sticking it in your pocket, and
then saying, “I’ve just seen this on the notice board\!” The number of
times I walked around with pocketfulls of pornographic material that I’d
confiscated from one place or another . . . But that’s students for you.

**Abbate:**

Do you think that made it uncomfortable for the female students?

**Mills:**

Probably, yes. But I think that’s—you know, I think sort of teenage boys
are going to be like that, whatever laws you lay down.

**Abbate:**

That’s true, you had young students.

**Mills:**

Yes. And it does make a difference. You know, you could tell them off
and it—they knew that it wasn’t acceptable, but they’d still do it. We
did have students expelled because of pornographic material.

**Abbate:**

Did you have problems with hacking? Students?

**Mills:**

Yes, but not a lot. Those hackers—and I can think of one or two in
particular that were really good at it—we used to employ them
part-time\! \[laughs.\] We used to actually say, “Right: We’ve caught
you hacking. Either you come and work for us part-time and help us sort
out the problem—stop other people hacking—or you’re expelled.” And being
a post-sixteen college, you could do that, because it wasn’t compulsory
to keep them. So yes, some of the students knew more about the system
than our technicians. So they used to train up the technicians, as it
were, in their part time. \[laughter.\]

**Abbate:**

Were these always boys?

**Mills:**

Yes. I don’t think we ever had a girl hacker, no. Again, I think it’s
the boy thing, isn’t it?

**Abbate:**

That’s interesting. I talked to someone at University of Greenwich who
said the same thing, that they took the hackers and made them into their
security force.

**Mills:**

Yes? \[laughs.\]

### Reflection on Career with Computers

**Abbate:**

What have you found to be the most satisfying aspects of working with
computers?

**Mills:**

I’m not sure. I mean, “satisfying” is when you’ve been, say, writing a
really complicated program, and you’ve had your head down for days, and
you test it, and it works. That is extremely satisfying. Yeah, and I
still do get a kick out of.

I mean, a lot of the things I do are more business-oriented than actual
computing-orientated. For example, this afternoon I’ve got a conference
call with Treasury in the States and Treasury in India, where we’re
trying to work out, among other things, how to get payment rejections
pulled back off the web, and it’s, you know, it’s quite complicated.
It’s more from a business point of view than a computing point of view
that I’ll be there.

**Abbate:**

They’re the users, right?

**Mills:**

What they’re trying to do is—I don’t want to get too technical here—all
the payment files that go out to all the banks: They’re trying to get
all the banks to report payment rejections in a standardized format.
That in itself is incredibly complicated, because the banks are all over
the world, so they’ve all got their own set of rules, and trying to get,
you know, banks that send in the report to report in exactly the same
way as a bank in England or in a bank in the States—but hopefully this
will be the case. And these rejections will be posted up on the Web, and
we will download our payments and that information about them into a big
data warehouse. But this is a big Treasury initiative that we’re sort of
jumping in on the back of; but it’s all to do with how the payments are
sent to the bank, as well as how the banks report. You know, the mapping
instructions all have got to be standardized, and it’s probably a year’s
work there—that we’re hoping that when it’s up and running, we can get
in on the back of.

**Abbate:**

So in terms of computing, that would be sort of user requirements,
system design, and specification.

**Mills:**

Yes, mm-hm.

**Abbate:**

So it’s that end of the . . .

**Mills:**

Yes. I’ve spent a lot of time, rather than the actual cutting code end,
more on the systems analysis side, the user requirements, and getting
into really quite technical banking issues, as opposed to computing
issues.

**Abbate:**

Do you enjoy that side?

**Mills:**

Yes, I do. I think I know a lot about the banking system now\! I knew
nothing when I came here.

**Abbate:**

It sounds like working with computers also gave you this opportunity to
get into other areas that you wouldn’t necessarily have walked in with
the qualification to do.

**Mills:**

No, probably not. I mean, if I wanted a mid-career change now—which I
don’t—but if I did, I could probably go in as a banking consultant.
Nothing to do with computing, just explaining to people about, you know,
the intricacies of bank liaison and all the different types of wires,
formats, and things like that—because I’ve picked that up from the work
I’ve been doing here, the systems work. I’ve had to find out a lot about
how the banking system works, and how things are . . . It never ceases
to amaze me, you know, that if we want to send a payment from here to
the U.K., it often goes by Cincinnati and India\!

**Abbate:**

I’m amazed.

**Mills:**

They fly all over the world, they really do\! Because sometimes we may
not have a link directly to the bank, so it’s got to go by three or four
different routes; you know, we send it to Chase Manhattan, who send it
to CitiBank, who send it to So-and-So—and these are all electronic
transfers going on, till it gets to the bank that will make the payment.
And, it’s quite fascinating\!

**Abbate:**

Does that mean you’re also involved in networking? Or just tangentially?

**Mills:**

Just tangentially, really. I mean, we have our own networking teams
upstairs, so if I have a problem I’ll go and see them; so it’s not an
area I get into a lot.

### Thoughts on the Field of Computing

**Abbate:**

How do you think the field of computing has changed since you’ve
started?

**Mills:**

It’s changed phenomenally, hasn’t it? I mean, if I go back sort of to
1970, say, to my first job, then we had no disks, one mainframe, one
line printer; all we really did was the payroll—because I think that was
the first system everybody put on was the payroll, wasn’t it? And that
was about it. If you were to write a program, you’d hand-write it out on
cards—on sheets of paper. That would actually be typed up on paper tape,
so if you wanted to do any amendments, it was cut your paper tape, slice
your new bit in. It then you then progressed onto cards, and you had to
mark the box of cards with a big “X,” so that if you dropped it . . . \!
\[laughs\]

**Abbate:**

I know what you mean.

**Mills:**

You’re older than you look in that case\! \[laughter.\]

**Abbate:**

No, personally I haven’t marked punch cards, but I’ve heard of this.

**Mills:**

All right. And then . . . You think of it now, I mean you’ve got—my PC
up my desk is phenomenally more powerful than this mainframe I used to
work on. Everything you do is on a computer, and the computers talk to
each other all over the world. I mean it’s just . . . And payroll is one
of the little insignificant things. It’s really about, well, data
warehousing more than anything else, isn’t it? Being able to access the
vast amount of information stored somewhere, with the Web and things
like that.

I mean, you probably know GE’s got this huge initiative where virtually
everything is going to be Web-enabled. Gone are the days of filling
in—you know, if you go off somewhere—your expenses, filling your
expenses form in by hand; it’s all done on the Web. Everything is
Web-enabled—or not everything now, but they’re moving that way. All the
things, the administrative things within a business, as well as the
actual function of the business itself, is put on the Web. We’ve got a
big e-pay . . . EPS, what’s it called?

**Abbate:**

Electronic Payment System?

**Mills:**

It’s “E-Payables System.” It’s that we get an invoice in; it’s scanned,
sent over to Mexico, where they perhaps add information—you know, enter
it in. That link will go \[over\], then it comes back over here; it’s
been paid into a global—you can see the copies of the invoice—so it’s
all on the Web. Every invoice that comes in is scanned, and its
picture’s put up on the Web, so if there’s any queries, you can go
back to the original piece of document—you know, paper—in an image
format, rather than having to look through the paper records. Anything
that’s incorrect with them, it’s pushed into a work-flow queue, so that
people work their way through correcting errors and things like that.

I mean, it . . . It governs your life now. You know, if you talk to
anybody down here: everybody’s got a PC; their work is governed, often,
by this work-flow—you know, that the next piece of work comes in, and
it’s there on the screen; they do that; the next one comes in—rather
than perhaps you deciding what you wanted to do, which I think was the
case in the past—probably is still for me as well, actually—but that’s
how it affects other people. It probably affects everybody, doesn’t it?

**Abbate:**

Mmm.

Do you think the culture of computing has changed? The type of people
who do it, and . . .

**Mills:**

Well, I’m the oldie here, you see . . .

**Abbate:**

Well, sort of at large.

**Mills:**

I think it’s still a young person’s . . . I don’t know where a lot of
the old ones are\! But . . . I mean, I’m the oldest. There’s Alan, who’s
mid-forties, and most of the others are less than 30, or 30—around 30\.
So yes, it’s definitely a . . . It seems—well, certainly here it seems
to be still a young person’s trade. So what happens to them afterwards,
I’m not too sure\! \[laughter.\]

**Abbate:**

There’s lots at universities . . .

**Mills:**

Well yes, I mean, the people at universities are typically 50, aren’t
they? 50 to 55\. You look at the Lecturers in computing—actually it’s
probably more, probably . . . Well, my husband’s what, 53? And he
reckons he’s virtually one of the youngest. Certainly at Leeds
Metropolitan University.

**Abbate:**

Because the young ones are lured off to industry?

**Mills:**

Yes. Because they don’t pay enough. And I think historically, perhaps,
where they got people like me, who wanted to go there because it was
flexible and had the long holidays, they don’t have that to offer now;
so I know they find it very, very difficult to recruit.

**Abbate:**

Do you think computing has become more open to women? Or less open over
time?

**Mills:**

I honestly don’t know. As I say, I think at the time when I first went
into it, it was open to women. Whether it still is . . . I suspect it
probably still is. I think once you’re in there, you move from job to
job, and so you rely on your experience or whatever in the previous job
to get you the next one. So, you know, if I was straight out of college
now, I think I’d be able to get in again quite easily. But as I said,
the people aren’t coming into college.

**Abbate:**

Do you hire people here?

**Mills:**

No. Mick, my boss, does the hiring. Actually, most of the recent people
that we’ve appointed have been men. But I don’t think that is because he
prefers men to women.

**Abbate:**

Right. It’s the pool.

**Mills:**

Yes. No, I’m sure he . . .

I think women have a different skill set. I think they’re probably more
methodical. I’m being very sexist here, aren’t I? I think women in
general are more methodical than men. I think they probably make better
programmers than men; but men, I think, have more come-up-and-go,
get-up-and-go, than women.

Karen, for example: She’s been here forever—well, not forever, but for
ages. And it suits her; she’s reasonably well-paid; she knows what she’s
doing—but I’m sure a man in her position would have moved on before now
and gone higher than she is. But, as I say, it’s convenient, she doesn’t
want to move her daughter . . . I think women in general lack ambition
compared to men—but I actually reckon they’re better programmers.

**Abbate:**

Ah, interesting\!

Do you have any advice for young women contemplating going into
computing today?

**Mills:**

Just do it\! Yes. Because I think it’s . . . It’s the one thing that you
can always get back into. I think for a long time there’s going to be a
shortage of people, so get in while you can. If you stop work, try and
keep yourself, like I did, reasonably up-to-date—because, I mean, it
moves on so rapidly—and you’ll get back in again.

**Abbate:**

All right. Well, I think I’ve probably asked all my questions, so: Thank
you very much\!

\[END OF RECORDING\]

Retrieved from
"<http://ethw.org/index.php?title=Oral-History:Judith_Mills&oldid=108569>"

[Categories](/Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* [Computing and
  electronics](/Category:Computing_and_electronics "Category:Computing and electronics")
* [Profession](/Category:Profession "Category:Profession")
* [People and
  organizations](/Category:People_and_organizations "Category:People and organizations")

## Contents

* [1 About Judith Mills](#About_Judith_Mills)
* [2 About the Interview](#About_the_Interview)
* [3 Copyright Statement](#Copyright_Statement)
* [4 Interview](#Interview)
  * [4\.1 Background and Education](#Background_and_Education)
  * [4\.2 Programming for Hepworth's the Tailors, Using
    COBOL](#Programming_for_Hepworth.27s_the_Tailors.2C_Using_COBOL)
  * [4\.3 Starting to Teach](#Starting_to_Teach)
  * [4\.4 Working for General Electric](#Working_for_General_Electric)
  * [4\.5 Balancing Work and Family
    Responsibilities](#Balancing_Work_and_Family_Responsibilities)
  * [4\.6 Being a Woman in the Field](#Being_a_Woman_in_the_Field)
  * [4\.7 Experiencing Sexual
    Discrimination](#Experiencing_Sexual_Discrimination)
  * [4\.8 Reflection on Career with
    Computers](#Reflection_on_Career_with_Computers)
  * [4\.9 Thoughts on the Field of
    Computing](#Thoughts_on_the_Field_of_Computing)

[![Powered by
MediaWiki](/resources/assets/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)](//www.mediawiki.org/)
[![Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki](/extensions/SemanticMediaWiki/includes/../resources/images/smw_button.png)](https://www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 21 November 2014, at 10:46\.

* This page has been accessed 3,069 times.

* [About ETHW](/ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* [Policies and disclaimers](/ETHW:Policies "ETHW:Policies")

