Toggle navigation   

ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki(Main_Page)

* ** Go ****()
  * Browse by Subject(ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * Encyclopedia(Encyclopedia)
  
  * Oral Histories(Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * First Hand Histories(First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * LandmarksMilestones(Landmarks)
  
  * Archives(Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * Education(ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * Random page(Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * Help(Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * Contact us(Special:Contact)
  
  * 
  * Recent changes(Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * New pages(Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* ** Actions ****()
  * View
    source(index.php?title=Oral-History:Diane_Wray&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source e")
  
  * History(index.php?title=Oral-History:Diane_Wray&action=history "Past revisions of this page h")
  
  * 
  * Oral-History(Oral-History:Diane_Wray)
  
  * Discussion(index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Diane_Wray&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page t")
  
  * 
* ** Tools ****()
  * What links
    here(Special:WhatLinksHereOral-History:Diane_Wray "A list of all wiki pages that link here j")
  
  * Related
    changes(Special:RecentChangesLinkedOral-History:Diane_Wray "Recent changes in pages linked from this page k")
  
  * Special
    pages(Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages q")
  
  * Printable
    version(index.php?title=Oral-History:Diane_Wray&printable=yes "Printable version of this page p")
  
  * Permanent
    link(index.php?title=Oral-History:Diane_Wray&oldid=108331 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * Page
    information(index.php?title=Oral-History:Diane_Wray&action=info)
  
  * Browse properties(Special:BrowseOral-2DHistory:Diane_Wray)
* ** Account ****(# "Account")
  * Log
    in(index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3ADiane+Wray)
  
  * 
  * Request account(Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Diane Wray

## About Diane Wray

Diane Wray began a career in programming in Britain in 1967 after
applying for a programming position at the Electricity Board. After
working there for five years she applied for a civil service job. Her
government career began at the Social Security Department and moved into
Securities. At the time of the interview her office was in charge of
handling and protecting government inquiries. Additionally, she helped
to enforce new technology security standards throughout government
offices.

In the interview she discusses her early life and first job at the
Electricity Board. It details her first experience with computers and
how she became a programmer. The interview then transitions into her
career in the British civil service. At various points Wray discusses
her experience as a woman working as a programmer and the discrimination
she experienced while trying to advance her career. The interview ends
with a discussion on how she balanced work and family.

## About the Interview

DIANE WRAY: An interview conducted by Janet Abbate for the IEEE History
Center, April 5, 2001\.

Interview \#636 for the IEEE History Center, The Institute of Electrical
and Electronic Engineers, Inc.

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
the IEEE History Center Oral History Program, IEEE History Center at
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ
07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include identification of
the specific passages to be quoted, anticipated use of the passages, and
identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Diane Wray an oral history conducted in 2001 by Janet Abbate, IEEE
History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

## Interview

INTERVIEW: Diane Wray\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: April 5th 2001\
PLACE: Department of Health, London

\

### Family and Education

**Abbate:**

I’m speaking with Diane Wray, April 5th, 2001\.

Well, just to begin at the beginning: When were you born?

**Wray:**

1947, September.

**Abbate:**

And where did you grow up?

**Wray:**

My father was in the British Army, so I grew up all over the world. I
went to fifteen schools; but my fifteenth school—I was quite lucky: my
father’s last posting was Germany, so I went to a British Forces
Boarding School in Germany, for the last four and a half years of my
education. So at least I got some stability there.

**Abbate:**

Wow\! Did your mother do anything, or was she just raising the family?

**Wray:**

Just raising the family, yes.

**Abbate:**

Did you have a big family?

**Wray:**

No, I was the only one. \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Tell me a bit about the schools you went to.

**Wray:**

Well, they were varied. I mean, when . . . If you went to a Forces
school, that was easy—or, easier—because, with moving around such a lot,
I think the teachers knew what they were having to cope with; they knew
that they would get children with different levels of ability, and
different stages, and so on. The difficult times were sort of in between
abroad postings, when we did a stint in England, and sometimes I’d be at
a school for three months. And that was difficult to be accepted—I mean,
all Forces kids found that—but also, there wasn’t an understanding of
the fact that you maybe weren’t as up to speed on some things, or you
were ahead on other things. But I think the last four and a half years,
though, that that was a great help, going to that one school the whole
time.

**Abbate:**

Were these generally single-sex schools, or were they mixed?

**Wray:**

All the Forces schools were mixed. I went to one single-sex school in
Portsmouth, and that was only for about four or five months; and the
last school was a boarding school, and it was comprehensive, and it was
coeducational. It was actually a forerunner, if you like, of them
bringing comprehensive education system into this country. So we were
streamed, yes. It was good. I mean, the headmaster had done a lot of
work in Canada, apparently—because I think they were ahead of us—and it
was felt that it was a good way, when you had a school for about 600
children with such varying abilities, who had no choice but to be away
from home. It did work well; I felt it worked, anyway. I liked it.

**Abbate:**

Were you interested in math and science when you were in school?

**Wray:**

Not particularly, no\! I was thinking about that this morning. It took
me three goes to get my maths O-level. I was sort of English and the
arts and so on, and maths was an uphill struggle for me.

**Abbate:**

Was that partly the teaching, you think? Or just your . . .

**Wray:**

I think, to be honest, it was as if somebody switched a light on, when I
was in my early twenties, when I did the first part of the BCS exams.
And then suddenly there I was—with only an O-level in maths, which took
me three goes to get—and then it logically made sense, whereas before it
was not something that I enjoyed or was particularly interested in. I
was suddenly thrown in from going from O-level to doing calculus and
goodness knows what\!

**Abbate:**

I’m not sure I understand what those exams are. What’s the BCS exam?

**Wray:**

British Computer Society. (Sue, that you’re going to speak to, Sue
Black: She’s involved in that.) British Computer Society’s been on the
go for a lot of years; I joined about thirty-something years ago. It’s a
society for computer professionals within Great Britain—I mean, its name
really is what it says—and you’ve got different levels of membership.
You know: join as a student, so maybe people just coming out of
university could join as a student; then you can go through Associate;
and then, in time, you could get full membership, because of the number
of years you might have been a member, and the sort of work that you
were doing—but there’s another route to getting full membership, and
that’s by doing examinations.

**Abbate:**

Ah, that’s the part I didn’t realize.

**Wray:**

Yes. And I did both routes.

**Abbate:**

So that was later on in your . . .

**Wray:**

It was. I did Part One when I was in my twenties; and then I did Part
Two—I actually sat the exams when I was 40—because somebody said to me,
“I see you’re a member of the BCS.” I said, “Yes.” “Well, that’s just
on experience.” So I thought, “All right, you: I’m going to go for
this\!” \laughs.\

So I did block release from work, and actually took the exams. And the
pass rate isn’t very high, so it’s fairly tough; it wasn’t easy. But I
enjoyed it.

**Abbate:**

All right, well, we’ll come back to that. So you’re kind of a late
bloomer in terms of doing math.

**Wray:**

I think so, yes.

**Abbate:**

Were your parents interested in math or technical things?

**Wray:**

Yes, my father, certainly; I think with my mother it was more the arts.
They used to sort of split, if I had to have help with homework: mum it
was English and history; my father it would be the sciences, and maths.
And I think—I’m not blaming my father, but I think he probably had less
patience than my mother did. And that maybe didn’t help; I don’t know.
\laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Did you feel you were expected to have a job or a career or support
yourself?

**Wray:**

Yes. When I left school, yes. I left school at 18, and came back to this
country, and I was fairly fortunate; I got a job pretty quickly with the
Electricity Board. It was a clerical job. Looking back, I think my
father was a bit disappointed; I think he’d hoped for better things; and
he was like a dog with two tails when I got into computing. I mean he
was just so delighted, you know. It was strange.

### First Job

**Abbate:**

How did you get that first job?

**Wray:**

The very first job? Not in computing, you mean?

**Abbate:**

Right.

**Wray:**

When I came back to this country, we had sort of a youth employment
service—I don’t know what it was called in those days—and you had to go
and see a careers advisor, and they sent you along for various jobs. I
wanted some sort of clerical function, at the very least; I didn’t want
to go to a factory or anything like that. And, not being snobby about
that, but they sent me to all sorts of places. In a couple of instances,
I actually said, “I’m sorry; it’s not for me.” One was a rope works, in
Wharf’s End down by the riverside; and again, I didn’t mind—it was
clerical work—but the walk was horrendous, you know, from the nearest
bus stop; and I thought, “I’m not going to be trotting along here at
night after work.”

And then the local Electricity Board show room were advertising for
people, and I applied, went along, and got a letter a couple of days
later, and just started very quickly. I left school in July, and
probably started there around about September. It was fairly quick.

**Abbate:**

And you were doing customer service there?

**Wray:**

Yes. It was a mixture of things, really. You were handling people’s
records, so when people moved, you’d make sure that the records were
changed and updated—but of course in those days it was mostly paper
records. Manning the switchboard, taking inquiries, and calming people
down when they had power cuts; things like that.

### Working with Computers

**Abbate:**

How did you first get any contact with computers?

**Wray:**

We went to stay with some friends in Winchester, probably that first
year that I was working. He was in the Army, and my parents had been
friends with him in Singapore, and Ken said, “Would you like to come to
where I work?” It was a place called Worthy Down, and it’s where they
had the Army payroll computer. He took me into this room with a huge,
trundling mainframe, and I thought, “Wow\! This is really something\!”

**Abbate:**

So you were immediately thinking that this would be . . .

**Wray:**

Oh, yes\! Yes, yes.

I think . . . For me it was never particularly the maths side of
computing that I’ve enjoyed, anyway. Give me a logic problem and I’m
happy; and I always was like that, as a kid, as well. Clark on logic.
And that’s a lot of what computers are all about.

**Abbate:**

How did you manage to get into it?

**Wray:**

How did I manage? They advertised within the Electricity Board for the
headquarters building—I was based in one of the little out-stations—and
they were recruiting for programmers. And I have to be honest, I don’t
really think they expected any females to apply\! Of course, I was quite
starry-eyed about having seen this huge mainframe and thought, “Ooh\!
This is worth a try\!” I went and sat the aptitude test, because in
those days, you know, you did the very formalized aptitude test—I’m not
even sure if that still happens these days—but I did that, and got
through, got an interview, and a very nice letter saying, “Thank you,
but no thank you.”

So, that was the first attempt. Then—within about a year, it was, I
think—they re-advertised, and I applied; and there was another female,
who’d applied the first time and got to exactly the same point as me,
and we were both taken on. \The reason was that\ in the meanwhile, in
that gap between the two interviews, there had been a lady who had been
working in the electricity industry, but it was atomic energy side of
things, and she was working on very technical programs about moving all
the bits around in the reactors and everything. She was getting married,
and she was moving back to the Northeast, where I lived; and of course
she applied for a transfer. So they didn’t have much option but to take
Sandra, and that opened doors \to other female programmers\,
basically.

### Gender and Work

**Abbate:**

So when you actually started, she was there?

**Wray:**

She was, yes.

**Abbate:**

So there were these three women there.

**Wray:**

That’s right, yes.

Throughout that period of time at the Electricity Board, there were some
comments, which now, I don’t think—well, I know that a woman wouldn’t
stand for. First question was—and this was my first interview: “Do you
have a boyfriend?” And I had. “Ah\! Just out of general interest,
whereabouts does he live?” Well, he didn’t live near to where I was
living—and I think that possibly had something to do with it, because
there they were, sitting \and thinking\, “Well, we’re going to make
some sort of investment, we’re going to train somebody, and we might
lose them.” And that was very much the attitude there. Because I
actually got asked that question at my second interview\!

**Abbate:**

And you said, “Oh, he lives right here\!”

**Wray:**

I said, “No, I don’t have \a boyfriend\,” which I didn’t have at the
time; but I actually got engaged one year later, because I had just met
somebody. I got engaged one year later, and it was actually said: “But
you said you didn’t have a serious relationship.” So I said, “Well, a
year is long enough to become serious about somebody\!” It’s weird. I
can remember the person who said it as well; and it was coming from one
quarter, so I’m not saying that was how they all were. \They were\ a
bit worried, I think about investing in training and so on, and perhaps
losing somebody.

**Abbate:**

Although statistically, I’ve heard, it’s the opposite: because men are
more likely to leave for a more promising job, and women are more likely
to actually stay.

**Wray:**

I think that is actually very true. I think it was a very blinkered
attitude that they had. But, in the days I’m going back to, they
actually had separate pay scales for men and women as well.

**Abbate:**

For the same job? For a programming job there’d be two . . .?

**Wray:**

That’s right. Oh yes. But this lady that I explained about, Sandra, whom
they’d had to bring in—she kept breaking the barriers, because she was
the highest paid woman in the Electricity Board. She was a Senior
Systems Analyst—and obviously, in the IT field, we were getting that
little bit more anyway—and she kept breaking the boundaries. And they
would say, “Oh, we’re going to have to redo the scales again\!”
\laughs.\ That was how it was\!

**Abbate:**

Was there legislation at some point that said “There has to be one
scale”?

**Wray:**

I’m not sure. I don’t really know when that happened. \Note: This
happened with the Equal Pay Act of 1970\.\ When I left the Northeastern
Electricity Board, as it was known then, I left there to join the Civil
Service, and there was one pay scale within the Civil Service. So, I
think probably it was the tail end of separate pay scales. But I don’t
know for sure; that’s probably something that’s worth delving a bit more
about.

**Abbate:**

How long were you there programming at the Electricity Board?

**Wray:**

Programming: let me think now, when did I leave? I started programming
in ‘67; married in ‘70; I think I left there about ‘71, ‘72—probably
1972\.

### Computer Programming at the Electricity Board

**Abbate:**

So you were there four or five years . . .

**Wray:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

And what kind of work were you doing?

**Wray:**

I started off as a trainee programmer on ICL machines—well, it was ICT
in those days: International Computers and Tabulators. It was a 1300
series machine, which was the sort that you could literally turn up the
volume and watch the program working. So if you had a loop, you could
actually say, “Right: I’m going to stop this; I’m just going to press
through an instruction at a time, and watch the binary lighting come
up.” And that was punch cards. It was billing programs, payroll,
costing: that sort of thing.

**Abbate:**

So you were actually programming it in binary, or assembler?

**Wray:**

No, it was machine code, which was as near to binary as anything. And
then they did move on to 470 machines, which was assembler. That was in
assembler. But that is one of the reasons why I left: because they were
bringing new intakes of people in, because they were becoming much more
ambitious with the sort of applications that they were going to be
developing—engineering, and so on—and they were expanding. But as they
were bringing new people in, they were training them in, on the 470
side, on user code, it was called, actually, which is equivalent to
assembler; and becoming reliant on those of us who had been there in the
early days, who were still doing the maintenance of the machine code,
while things were being converted. Eventually I found myself in a
position of being the one person looking after machine code programs. So
I thought, “This is it\! I’m off\!” \laughs\

### Joining the Civil Service

**Abbate:**

So then you joined the Civil Service.

**Wray:**

Joined the Civil Service, yes.

**Abbate:**

What was your first position?

**Wray:**

I came in as a direct entrant. Well, to join the Civil Service: they
will take graduates from university, and you will come in at the junior
management level, Executive Officer Grade; and they were also accepting
people to come in as direct entrant Executive Officers, with sufficient
background in programming—so I got in by that route.

**Abbate:**

So that was a good skill to have, in terms of getting ahead.

**Wray:**

It was. Yes. I took a drop in salary. It wasn’t a tremendous amount; it
was—well, like between ten and twenty percent, so it seemed a fair
amount to me, I suppose\!—but I was willing to do that to come into what
I felt was going to be a fairer environment, with more opportunity, to
be honest, to move on. And I don’t mean move in progression up the
salary scale and promotion ladders, totally; it was to not be sort of
held back by old technology—and I was becoming very conscious that
things were starting to move more rapidly.

**Abbate:**

Now, once you’re in the Civil Service, you can move to different
agencies? You have a much wider . . .

**Wray:**

Yes, you can. There are more opportunities. I haven’t moved around so
much, I suppose.

**Abbate:**

Where did you start?

**Wray:**

I started in Department of Social Security, in the Northeast, and I
moved up there through programming to systems analyst, functional
analyst. The last job I had up there, which would be the last job that I
would say was on the development side, was probably mid-’80s, and—gosh,
it doesn’t seem that long ago\!—and it was a very big software project.
The National Insurance—you’ve got something similar, obviously, \in the
US\—National Insurance in this country is a massive, massive, massive
application that the Department of Social Security run. And we were
developing a new system, but unfortunately, we were ahead of the
technology. What we were wanting to do, technology wasn’t really in
place to support it. It was a very ambitious program; it was called the
Operational Strategy—so they were revamping the pensions side of things;
they were revamping the contribution side; a centralized index for
everybody in the country . . . and something had to give\! And they
pulled the plug on the project that I’d been working on, and there were
about a hundred of us who had been working on it for two years. That was
it\!

**Abbate:**

Were you the head of that project?

**Wray:**

No, no. I was a team leader; I had a small team.

**Abbate:**

What was the technology that you were working with?

**Wray:**

We were using . . . We hadn’t got to the coding stage; we’d stepped
right the way back, and we were using SSADM. Have you heard of that?
It’s Structured Systems Application Design Methodology, and you go
through a very, very rigid process. You step right away, and you work
very closely with the users as well; so you go through the logical
design, the physical design; you’re building up entities and attributes,
and you’re thinking, “God, I don’t even know what these are for\!”—but
at some point it does all start to come into place. The project itself
was being run under Prince, which you’ve probably heard about; Prince is
a method for project management. So, there was an awful lot of
documentation; it was very documentation-bound—but it meant that we were
doing it one hundred percent correctly, and every step of the way you
could track exactly why you were there, and why you’d got there. And
that was the first time I’d ever really worked on a project that was as
well documented. It wasn’t back-of-cigarette-packet stuff, you know; it
was really good.

**Abbate:**

Where was the technical obstacle?

**Wray:**

I think it was a mixture of things. Well, the technology: there wasn’t
the speed or the capacity, effectively, so we were going to have to . .
. To the user, it was going to look to them as if they were actually
working online, but they weren’t going to be. What was going to happen
was, everything that they’d input was going to be rolled up and
processed overnight. Whether it was that the phones weren’t there or
what, I don’t know; but I think we probably were rather ahead, in any
case, in that we were trying to do what to the user would look like a
true on-line application, but it wasn’t. What we were going to be
providing would have done the job, but it wasn’t actually true, if you
like. So if a clerk had a problem in between the update being run, they
would think, “Well, hang on now, haven’t I put an update in?” Now, to
me, that should actually be there; and it wasn’t going to be.

And the demands for all these other projects meant that they were short
of manpower as well. So when it looked like our project was going to
have difficulty, it was decided that we were to be dispersed to various
other projects, which is what happened. I went on to the pensions
project for a while, and I was looking after upwards of about 20-odd
programmers. So I went back to being a programming team leader, rather
than a functional analyst.

But in the meantime, they were looking for people to join the IT
security unit that was moving from London up to the Northeast.

**Abbate:**

What town were you based in?

**Wray:**

That was Newcastle-on-Tyne.

After school—my parents were actually from the Northeast—and so after
school, my father’s last posting, very luckily really, was back to the
Northeast. So I was there until 1988\. No, that’s not true; in 1990,
’91, I came down to London.

### Security Work for Civil Service

**Abbate:**

So after doing the pension work you switched to this security work? And
that was still for the . . .

**Wray:**

Yes. That was still Social Security—still based in Northeast—and I was
there for three years, doing security work.

And then an opportunity arose. At the point when I left, when the
project I’d been working on folded—that would be 1987, actually, because
I was 40\. I can remember that, because I’d passed BCS Part II in the
August, and the project folded in the August, and it was my fortieth
birthday in the September—so it all seemed to happen all at once, you
know\! I didn’t know if I was coming or going\!

So I’ve jumped ahead a bit there. So, I moved on to the security side of
things because I’d got an interest in that from doing the Computer
Society exams. Because you cover such a wide spectrum of things, and we
were talking about the new Data Protection Act, and so on, and I found
that when I had a choice of assignments to do, I was naturally veering
towards security-based ones. So, there was an interest growing there.

**Abbate:**

It seems like in the late ‘80s that was still kind of a new field, the
security side of things. Tell me a bit about the Data Protection Act.
I’m not sure when that was passed.

**Wray:**

The Data Protection Act was 1984\. I think, certainly in government
departments, we thought it was going to have tremendous impact. The
Department of Social Security, for example: they set up a large unit of
people to deal with this flood of requests that they were going to get,
people writing in asking about their personal information. And it didn’t
happen, and they had to disband the unit. They seem to have a record for
doing that, don’t they\!

I’d been involved in the data protection side probably up until two
years ago, when it was decided. I’ve moved, because I’ve had a few jobs,
about three jobs, in security. It was decided it was more logical to put
it with the departmental records side, because the new Act covers paper
records and not just electronic records, which our previous act did—and
we tend to get requests from the same people. I could almost name three
or four names that we get a request from every year. But that was
interesting, because I think it was also giving people more right, if
you like, to have access to their records. But when all came to all,
they weren’t terribly interested\!

**Abbate:**

What kind of work did you actually do in security?

**Wray:**

Right. To start off, when I first moved in, in Social Security, I was
looking after various projects. One of the things I would do, for
example, is: these strategy projects I was talking to you about—I was
going out and doing security testing on them; so basically, trying to
break the system.

**Abbate:**

What was the concern? People breaking into the system?

**Wray:**

It was twofold, but at that point I think the concern was more the
clerical staff doing things that they shouldn’t do, either deliberately
or accidentally, and getting to where they shouldn’t be. Obviously
there’s a record held for every person in the country on the
centralized index, and there are audit checks in place; and if a clerk,
for example, wanted to look at Maggie Thatcher’s record, there would
actually be an automatic warning printed out at supervisory level to
say, “Somebody’s been trying to look at this person.” So anybody who is
well-known is protected; transsexuals, they’re protected; and
supergrasses—you know, people who’ve had their identity changed because
they’ve maybe turned Queen’s Evidence or something like that. So that
was one of the things we were very keen to be sure it was actually
working properly: to see if we could somehow get into the system. So we
were sitting legitimately with one of the strategy work stations, but we
were trying ways of breaking in. And that was quite good, because we
found sixty-odd faults.

**Abbate:**

Now, was this system on a network at the time? Or more free-standing?

**Wray:**

Yes. Yes it was networked.

**Abbate:**

That might have been another layer of concern.

**Wray:**

That’s right, yes. I mean, one of the things I was doing was awareness,
as well. I’ve been involved in that ever since I joined security, and we
had a network of security managers and liaison offices throughout the
smaller offices around the country. So we used to train them as well.
And I think people were becoming—and in the security world as well,
actually—more aware that communications were becoming the up-and-coming
part of security. No longer could you say, “Right, we’ve got a
mainframe, and we’re going to lock the door and put a guard on the
door.” You know, the scenario was changing, definitely.

**Abbate:**

Were there any high-profile hacker cases of people breaking into
computers here?

**Wray:**

You mean within government? Or not?

**Abbate:**

Well, anywhere. I mean, in the States there were several incidents that
raised people’s awareness, but I don’t know about here.

**Wray:**

I’m trying to think, because I tend to sort of lump them all together.
Shiffreen. . . Oh, he was in the States, though, wasn’t he: Robert
Shiffreen? I think he was in the States. We have had some cases. And
interestingly enough—I can’t actually name names; I think there was some
Robert somebody-or-another, and they are now earning money by—what is
it?—poacher-turned-gamekeeper, effectively. They will come and talk at
security conferences, you know, the national ones that run, and so on.

**Abbate:**

“This is how I would break into your system?”

**Wray:**

Yes\! Yes.

### Work for the CCTA

**Abbate:**

Now that’s interesting.

So, let’s see: you’re still at Newcastle at this point.

**Wray:**

At that point I was still at Newcastle, yes. 1990\. There was an
opportunity came up to . . . This is where something you said
earlier—you can actually move around more, if you wish, within our
Civil Service. And it was an opportunity to do a loan to a part of the
Cabinet Office, which was called CCTA; it was the Central Computing and
Telecommunications Agency, but always known as CCTA. The task there was
to provide advice and guidance to government departments—and that was
extremely interesting, because that was an opportunity to find out, from
the center, what the policy was; but not only go out to departments and
say, “Well, this is how you should be doing it,” but quite often to
provide some leverage for them to be able to say, “And I need resources,
because CCTA have said I need resources.”

**Abbate:**

Ah, interesting.

**Wray:**

Yes; it needed that voice, if you like, from the center. It tends to
come low down on priorities, because people think, “Well, security’s all
well and good, but what does it give me? What do I get extra for it?”
And you’ve got to try to convince them.

**Abbate:**

So there’s a policy regarding privacy or security that you can say,
“Well, we are required to do this, so . . .”

**Wray:**

Yes, because there is a government security policy, and all departments
are expected to adhere to that. And we are now moving towards—it’s just
become an international standard: its international standard is ISO
17799; British Standard is BS7799\. (They have an extra “1” in, because
the original international 7799 is about stress on metals, something
crazy like that\!) But we’re moving towards that—and we’ve been told we
have to, by the Cabinet Office—which means we have to have plans in
place to comply, and then we’ve got to go for compliance; so we’re
putting a lot of effort into that. We’ve got something—at long last, I
suppose\!—that is telling us that we’ve got to do something, and
departments can’t really ignore it. You know, the high managers have got
to take notice of it, because it’s expected now.

**Abbate:**

Did you have any involvement in standards bodies?

**Wray:**

No. Not myself, no.

**Abbate:**

Just do what they say?

**Wray:**

Yes\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Well, it’s been a long time coming, standards for security.

**Wray:**

It has, actually. Like risk assessment: if you follow a particular
method for risk assessment, and you do it properly, that can sort of
lead you, if you like, to a degree, down the right path.

When I joined CCTA, one of the jobs I had there was to write—it was 84
government organizations—saying, “Have you got the security in place?
Have you got a policy? What percentage of somebody’s time are you giving
to security?” You know. And it was a multi-part questionnaire, and then
that was every six months—it was almost like a rolling program. In
between supporting other government departments, that was the main thing
that I did back at base—just kept having to go back to the IT directors
in government departments, saying, “Okay, what are you doing? Is there
any improvement since last time?”

**Abbate:**

Did you try to test their systems? Did you have people try and break in
or something?

**Wray:**

Not when I was at CCTA. No, we didn’t. I think that the various bodies
that work in security . . .

I have to say that the role of the unit I used to be in . . . There were
twenty of us, and that was interesting, because all the others were
men—I was the only woman there.

**Abbate:**

Really\!

**Wray:**

Yes. And there was sort of a little bit of a joke, that I was the token
woman, but it was never meant nastily. And in fact, it turned out . . .
It’s strange. There were one or two IT Security Officers, who are people
who look after security for whole department. I was off work for about
five and a half months—I had an accident and I was immobilized—and I
used to support the House of Commons; and the ITSO at House of Commons
said, “I’ll wait till Diane comes back. It’s all right\! I’ll wait.”
Now, he might have been putting off what I was expecting him to do\! But
I don’t think that was the case. You know, he got used to me. He was a
crusty old thing, and yet, for some reason—I don’t know whether it was
being a woman or what—but I just managed to get on okay with him.

**Abbate:**

You must have been one of the more experienced people in the area,
because it seems like you started pretty early in security.

**Wray:**

Yes. It’s not helped, though. There’s an expression—what is it? “Don’t
make yourself irreplaceable, because you won’t get promoted\!”

**Abbate:**

Ah, interesting\! \laughs\

**Wray:**

Yes? I think that might even be a Dilbertism. \laughs.\

\
It probably would have been sour grapes about a year ago, but when CCTA
. . . They decided that there was going to be a change in the way
security was organized in government; this is at the center. You
obviously know we have the Security Service—we’ve got MI-5 and
MI-6—well, the Security Service are the people that look after
internal security within the country. So, it was decided, instead of
having three lots of people—Security Service; CCTA where I was; and CSG,
which is Cheltonham-based; they’re very technical security oriented—it
was decided they would take CCTA out of the equation. Security
responsibility technically would be Cheltonham, and sort of managerially
would be the Security Service. So it meant there was no role for the
group that I was in, and we were dispersed, dispatched to the four
winds, et cetera\! And, I was quite fortunate, really, because I’d not
long been back on my feet and got back to work, and there was a job
advertised, and . . .

Something I didn’t explain was that I was temporarily promoted, while I
was in Newcastle. I was in the job for about two or three months, and I
was temporarily promoted. The boss there said, “Well, I want you to take
on a team, do this, do that.” And when I came down to London, that
continued: CCTA said, “We want you at that level. Come in at that
level.” But, when I joined this department, \the Department of
Health\ where I am now, seven years ago. . . . I was just back to work
and looking to see what I was going to do when \CCTA\ folded in the
July or August of 1994\. And there was a job advertised, and I thought,
“I know the ITSO\!” So I rang up, and I said, “I see you’ve got a job
advertised in the team”—basically, it’s his deputy—“Can you tell me a
little bit more about it?” And the first thing he said was, “Well, do
you know anything about IT security?” \laughs.\ So I said, “Well, just
a little bit\!” And I said to him, “I have been in security for X
years,” you know, and then he suddenly went—he said, “Di? That’s Diane
at the other end of the phone\!” And he just couldn’t believe it. You
know, he said, “Are you really, really sure?” Because I was going to
have to take a step back. But I said, “I’ve got no guarantee that I’m
going to find a job temporarily promoted at that level, and I’d much
rather go for a job I know I’m going to enjoy—and, yet again in my
career, take a step back over. So I joined here six years ago—seven
years ago. But Chris left about eighteen months ago, and they advertised
the job. And you don’t sit and think, arrogantly, “Well it’s mine; I’m
going to get it\!” But the job was advertised, and they brought in
somebody from another department with three years’ experience. So it was
a bit of a blow, to say the least\! But it was one of those things.

**Abbate:**

Now, was that a man or a woman that they brought in?

**Wray:**

It’s a man.

**Abbate:**

Do you think that was a factor in it?

**Wray:**

I think there were various factors. What I said about not making
yourself irreplaceable: that was slightly tongue-in-cheek, but I don’t
think it was as tongue-in-cheek as all that, really, because they got
the best of both worlds: they retained me, so they didn’t have to
replace me, and they brought in somebody else—who I’ve basically carried
for about fourteen, fifteen months, \and who yells at\ my staff as
well. . . . I’m losing a member of staff, he was so fed up. . . . So,
I’ve felt that I’ve almost been piggy-in-the-middle: trying to protect
the staff that I’ve got, and trying to make sure that no dreadful gaffs
are dropped. I’ve had to really do some bailing out, at times, to the
point of a very important public inquiry going to have the plug pulled
on its network connections, because of a lack of understanding of just
what the setup was\!

We’re very much into inquiries at the moment, in this country; very
much. \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Was this a government agency?

**Wray:**

If it was an inquiry about—well, we got involved in the BSE \“mad cow
disease”\ inquiry: it’s a free-standing inquiry, but we give
assistance, in that we will help with the provision of the IT facilities
for them, effectively, and we will let them use our technical support
people. But the emphasis is very much independent. You know, none of the
high officials in the department would be able to influence what the
findings of the inquiry are. It’s very much aboveboard. \laughs.\ But,
I mean, Steve Lawrence—Stephen Lawrence was a young guy who was killed
in South London; he was a black youngster, and I think he was stabbed
and left dying at a bus stop. Now, that inquiry would have been funded
and looked after by the Home Office. So it depends which department an
inquiry is pertinent to, you know.

**Abbate:**

In any case, it wouldn’t be good if it was thrown into a muddle because
of a security problem.

**Wray:**

That’s right. Oh, no, no, no.

There’s another thing, I suppose. All the years being in the Civil
Service, you get to the point—and you may well find people, when you are
doing your other travels and interviews—who’ve almost got locked in.
That’s what I feel now, because I’m 53, and in six and a half years’
time I will be 60: am I really going to throw away a pension that’s half
my salary? (I wouldn’t throw it away; it would be frozen, and then I
would get it based on what I’m earning now.) I don’t know; I’m not too
sure. My partner’s out in the big wide world and has had several jobs
since he left CCTA (because we met while I was there), and he’s doing
okay. So, I don’t know: do I stick to what’s familiar? Like you were
saying before, women do tend to stay. Men are a little more ready to
jump, I think.

### Balancing Family and Career with Government Support

**Abbate:**

So he’s also a computer . . .

**Wray:**

He is, yes. He’s in security. So we have plenty to talk about\!
\laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Do you have children?

**Wray:**

No, I don’t.

**Abbate:**

So you haven’t had to worry about sort of balancing family with work . .
.

**Wray:**

No. I think that was a fairly definite decision, as well, that . . . I
was talking to a friend just the other day—she’s an IT auditor—and it
was \about\ the fact that things started to move so rapidly; it would
probably have been in the early ‘80s. I thought, “Gosh, this is all
speeding up,” and that was when I thought, “The biological clock is
really ticking here.” But really, I wouldn’t—this is my personal view—I
wouldn’t have wanted to return immediately to work; and I didn’t have
\anyone to help with childcare\. My husband’s mother died; my parents
are both dead; we have nobody, in any case, whom we could have asked—no
relations . . .

**Abbate:**

To help look after the kids.

**Wray:**

Yes. Which I probably wouldn’t have done anyway; I’m very, very
independent. I think my upbringing probably made me that way. So that
was a fairly definite decision that we made.

**Abbate:**

Is there support, if you’re working for the Civil Service? Do they have
provisions for paid leave, or . . . ?

**Wray:**

They give fairly good maternity—and, now I believe, paternity—leave. And
in the summer, in this office for example, they run a crèche, you know,
during the holidays. And for the Easter holidays you see the mums coming
in, and they’re bringing their little ones, and they put them into the
crèche for the day. But there’s nothing sort of full-time; you know, you
are expected to make your own arrangements for the majority of the time,
definitely. But we’ve got some \accommodations\. I mean, for example,
Denise: She’s senior management, and Denise has two young children, and
she’s managed. You know, she juggles her career and bringing up these
two little girls she’s got, but she’s not in today; she works at home on
a Thursday.

**Abbate:**

Are they flexible about that?

**Wray:**

Yes, they are. Now, I’m saying she works at home; either that or she
only works four days a week. But we have another senior manager, and
she’s got two young children, and she only works three and a half or
three days a week. And that’s by agreement . . .

**Abbate:**

But longer hours?

**Wray:**

No, she just works for three-fifths of what the job would normally
bring. I think it might be four days she works. So they are fairly
flexible. I mean I’ve never explored it, because I’ve never really
needed to. I think they’ve moved on, certainly.

### Gender and Technology Career

**Abbate:**

Have you . . . I guess you’ve told me a couple of incidents. Have you in
general felt that as a woman you encountered overt discrimination, or
less access to promotion or raises or things? I know that very first
interview . . .

**Wray:**

Yes. Yes, I think that probably is. I was talking about the first
interview because that’s when I actually had some tangible feedback, but
yes, I think there is an element of that—definitely. There are some
areas, I think, or some departments, who are less likely to be so; and I
think when I was at the Agency—you know, that was part of the Cabinet
Office—I was probably at my happiest there, to be honest. I really,
really enjoyed that job. There was no—I don’t know—there didn’t seem to
be any bar to whom you could speak to, or how you were accepted . . .
and the Civil Service is less starchy and stuffy than it was. But from
my own point of view, I feel I have reached my glass ceiling—definitely.

**Abbate:**

Do you think it’s harder or easier for women in IT, as compared to other
parts \of the Civil Service\?

**Wray:**

I’m not sure. I wouldn’t like to say, because I haven’t really got wide
experience elsewhere; but looking within the division I’m in, which is
the IT division: our IT director has quite a few \female\ senior
managers, so there doesn’t seem to have been a bar here—certainly not in
the Department of Health. But there’s another expression I nearly got my
eyes poked out for using once: “To be thought half as good as a man, a
woman actually has to be twice as good.” Have you heard that one?
“Fortunately, this is not difficult\!” And then you run\! \laughs.\

Yes, I think it is a bit harder. I think for a woman, you can be
considered as being “soft” before you’ve even done or said anything.
Before you even start, they think, “Oh, is there really the backbone
there?” So you do have to work at it a bit harder, I think.

**Abbate:**

Do you have to project some kind of tough persona?

**Wray:**

I think that helps, but unfortunately, that’s not the way I do it. And
that possibly hasn’t helped me. I mean, this is classic, really, was
\when the new male ITSO was\ shouting and yelling and screaming \at
my staff\ a couple of months ago. And Denise, my boss, had the two of
us in afterwards, and she was absolutely brilliant—she’s really handled
it well, I think—and she just said, “Right: I want you in, we’re going
to talk.” She’d obviously had a talk on her own with him, but I pointed
out \to him\ that you’ll actually get more out of somebody if you
explain to them—and you don’t have to grovel or beg—but if you explain
rather than banging the table and demanding, I think you actually get
more in the long run. It might mean you’ve got to be that bit nicer than
sometimes, deep down, you really want—you know, sometimes you do feel:
“Grrr\!” But if I get annoyed—and I don’t jump up and down and get
annoyed—but at work, if I’m in any way terse, I think they probably know
that is really, really serious—because it’s very rare, and it has to be
really that something bad’s happened.

So, I’ve probably not answered directly . . .

**Abbate:**

No, I think you have.

**Wray:**

. . . but I think you’ve got the gist of what I’m saying.

**Abbate:**

Do you think that men in the computer field are less endowed with the
social graces than men in other areas?

**Wray:**

Oh yes, definitely. Yes. Not everyone, I know. But, yes, I’ve come
across some real oddballs, if that’s what you mean: definitely. I think,
probably, yes, the IT field does attract its share of “weirdos.”
\laughs.\ Not a very nice thing to say\! And often people who are
extremely clever—but I think there’s a fine line between being really,
really clever and insanity\! \laughs.\ And some of the people I have
known—and funnily enough, it’s been the men, as well—I mean, one guy
used to come in to work—in the States it might be different, but over
here\!—in Bermuda shirts and big floppy hat in the summer. I mean the
big, florally-patterned Bermuda shorts\! That was Ian . . . He got
retirement on medical grounds, and yet he was absolutely brilliant\! You
know, give him a piece of code that needed debugging, and he could go
straight to the problem. So yes, I think you’ve got something there. We
do have more, I think, more than our share\!

### Overall Enjoyment of Career

**Abbate:**

What have you found to be the most satisfying aspect of working with
computers?

**Wray:**

Over the whole of my career? Do you know, probably the very, very early
days. I enjoy very much what I do now, but that isn’t so hands-on.
Awareness is a large part of what I do, and I enjoy that very much; and
when you’re answering somebody’s question, or you’re solving a problem
for them. But if you’re thinking more hands-on, the very early . . .
Once I’d stopped being frightened of computers, I mean—the first six
months were hell.

**Abbate:**

Really?

**Wray:**

Oh yes\!

**Abbate:**

Why?

**Wray:**

I don’t know if it’s true of everybody, but I’ve spoken to other
programmers who’ve said the same thing: When you’re learning a new
programming language, you think, “When is this actually going to sink
in?” But your first time is the worst. And then all of a sudden,
it’s—like I said, probably, about maths—the penny drops, and it
becomes clearer. But it was about six months, and I wasn’t the only one.
Uphill struggle . . .

**Abbate:**

Well, that was in binary, too.

**Wray:**

Yes, yes. You were having to come to terms with an awful lot. You didn’t
have all the code that you wanted to access, for example, in the memory
at any one time. You had, I think it was 800—no, 200—words of memory,
and you had to pull things down from the rolling drums with
instructions, so there’s a lot of organization to it, as well. But I
found that very satisfying, because I was working so near to the
machine’s level. That was what was good. I think that was a good
background, actually.

It ceased to be challenging when I moved on to COBOL, in latter years. I
did code in COBOL, and then I was team leader, programming team leader,
so I was still helping my staff, although I wasn’t doing much hands-on
coding. But then we had middleware, and that was taking a lot of the fun
away, you know—the challenge wasn’t there. The real challenge, I think,
was actually being at the machine level, and tinkering and fine-tuning.
Making it play tunes, even\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Just for fun, you mean?

**Wray:**

Yes\! We didn’t really have the time to do that; our engineers used to,
though, because each instruction had a different pitch to it. So you
could actually make it play “Happy Birthday,” and things like that. And
we’d turn the volume up . . . But that, as I say, was how we used to
track if we had a loop, because you could hear a repetitive sound. A
loop is when you’re going straight round and round in the same set of
instructions. But sometimes there can be a blip: so it sounds like
everything is going okay, and then suddenly there’s a blip, and you
think, “No, that didn’t ought to be there.” So you were using a lot more
of your senses, really. Because we used to test our own programs, so not
only did you feed the cards in, but you could listen, you could stop it,
you could step it through.

**Abbate:**

So there was a volume control just so that you could debug by ear?

**Wray:**

Yes, yes. Yes.

**Abbate:**

I had never heard that about.

**Wray:**

That was probably not what its use was for; it was probably for the
engineers when they were doing their \diagnostics\.

You know, you had the big console, and there were the rows of lights,
and when an instruction came up, you had the little neon lights, and
you’d have banks of four—one, two, four, eight. \Draws a row of four
lights.\ So you could see your instructions. So if you had a 37, which
was a pick-up instruction, that light \points to rightmost light\
would be on, because that was a “one,” and that \points to second light
from right\ was the “two,” and so it was “pick up.” You know, that was
three—and then your “seven,” you’d have whatever combination here
\draws a second row of lights\ would be for “seven.”

\Drawing:\

0011 = 3

0111 = 7

**Abbate:**

So the lights would be spelling out the binary code for that particular
instruction.

**Wray:**

Yes\! But as it stepped through, if you turned the volume up, you could
actually hear it as well.

**Abbate:**

It’s just interesting that whoever designed the machine thought of the
volume as a diagnostic tool.

**Wray:**

Yes\! Yes, that’s right.

**Abbate:**

I don’t know if there were American computers that had that.

**Wray:**

Well, this is probably a museum piece, of course.

**Abbate:**

That’s great. I did some programming in the mid-’80s, that was my only
hands-on stuff.

**Wray:**

What were you using?

**Abbate:**

I was doing C(C "C")Unix(UNIX "UNIX") stuff, at MIT. It was
something called Project Athena, which had—that’s where the Kerberos
security system came from, which you might have heard of.

**Wray:**

Ah. Yes. Yes I have, yes.

**Abbate:**

I had nothing to do with that, but . . .

**Wray:**

Did you enjoy it, then? Did you like it?

**Abbate:**

I liked it a lot.

**Wray:**

Yes?

**Abbate:**

Yes. And again, not math so much. What I liked was—I was doing sort of
systems support—and I liked that you got immediate feedback. You’d get a
problem report in the morning, and often by the end of the day you would
have solved it, and there’d be a happy user. So it was—it wasn’t like
grand theory design, but you had this immediate impact, and it was
satisfying.

**Wray:**

Yes, yes. I think that’s true. There were downs, when you felt, “Gosh,
this is a problem and I’m really not . . . You know, it’s staring me in
the face, the answer, and I can’t get to the bottom of it.”

Now, when you look at what we’ve got: it doesn’t leave me cold—because
obviously I wouldn’t still be doing IT security—but things have changed
so much. I mean, you were talking about hacking and so on: one of the
things, one of my next jobs is going to be to do a spec to have a
company, or maybe part of a government organization, perhaps CSG—the
people from Cheltonham, you know, who are sort of the boffins—do some
penetration testing, and see if they can break into our systems in a
controlled way. “Ethical hacking,” it’s known as\!

**Abbate:**

Ah\! Really?

**Wray:**

Penetration testing is “ethical hacking,” you know; that’s its fancy
name, apparently. So that’ll be quite interesting.

But a lot of the time we’re monitoring what people do on the Internet,
and helping with investigations, and, as I said, training and awareness
is a big thing, and I’m going to be doing a big risk assessment, towards
the British Standard. We’ve got to do that first and foremost, do a risk
assessment using CRAM. Have you heard of CRAM?

**Abbate:**

No.

**Wray:**

It’s a government-preferred method for risk assessment and management.
“CCTA Risk Assessment and Management.”

**Abbate:**

But CCTA no longer exists?

**Wray:**

They do exist, but they’re based in Norwich now, and the security group
doesn’t exist. The government did a review of protective marking—you
know, if you want something, a document or file, to be kept at a certain
level of security. We used to have “unclassified but sensitive,” then
you got into the “restricted,” the “secret,” “top secret,”
“confidential”—all that sort of thing, yes? Any document can be
marked “restricted,” and if it is restricted, it has to be afforded
certain levels of security. It was partly the reorganization of the way
the markings scheme worked—which sounds a bit strange, I know—but it had
this knock-on ripple-down effect that meant that they said, “Well, in
that case, we’ll push everything to the security service on the policy
side of things.” And to the security group \at CCTA\, “Thank you very
much; find yourselves some other jobs.”

### Mentors and Changes for Women in Computing

**Abbate:**

Did you have any mentors or role models who encouraged you in your
computing career?

**Wray:**

Yes. In the early days, certainly, and it was this lady who was at the
Electricity Board when I actually got the job: Sandra Rowstron. She
lives in Australia now. It’s a shame, because she’d be very interesting
to talk to, actually. She taught me an awful lot. I mean, she was my
line manager—not immediately—and to be quite honest, I think she thought
I was rather a dizzy little dolly-bird. She actually told me that a long
time later\! When I first arrived, Sandra was the great old age of about
26, and I was twenty or something, and she sort of took me under her
wing, and took the time and trouble to explain things to me as well, and
I think that was very good and very useful. One of the big bits of work
that I did in the early days was the conversion when the U.K. went
decimal; when our currency changed from the old pounds, shillings, and
pence. That was 1971, and that was when I very first worked for Sandra,
and we spent an awful long time and a lot of work converting the
programs so that they would deal with decimalization. And she’s been a
friend every since\! I’m still in touch with her.

And oddly enough, when she was taken on she didn’t like children at all,
and she was never considered to be a “risk” in any way—and she’s got two
children\! \laughs.\ They’re very grown-up now, but at the time when I
left to join the Civil Service, Sandra actually left to have her first
child, much to everybody’s amazement\! We never thought she would have
children\! \laughs.\ There you go.

**Abbate:**

Interesting. When did she leave the U.K.?

**Wray:**

She left . . . She had Penny, and so we’re talking about when I joined
the Civil Service, within about some years, and they’ve lived abroad
more or less ever since. Yes, she’s been out for a long time. They went
to live in the Gilbert and Ellis Islands, or it’s known as Kiribati—the
first place that celebrated the millennium, yes? Kiribati. And her
husband was a marine engineer, and so they lived over there for quite a
lot of years. Then they went to New Zealand, and they’ve now moved to
Australia.

**Abbate:**

Do you think computer jobs have become more open to women since you
started?

**Wray:**

Oh yes\! Definitely. I think probably when I started, it was . . .
Something that you said early on about maths: I mean, that was my view,
you know, “Wow, this is all going to be really mathematical stuff.”
Women were very much in the minority then. Women are still very much in
the minority in the IT security field, actually. But I’ve seen that
changing over the last four or five years. I think there’s been a
definite shift, and it’s a constant shift as well.

**Abbate:**

How has the field as a whole changed since you started? Sort of major
trends in computing?

**Wray:**

It’s moving so much more rapidly\! Extremely rapidly. Well, I certainly
find that with the things that I’m interested, in IT security.

And I think I’ve said to you, I don’t think that you’re as close \to
the machine\—there’s so much more done for people in IT now, so much
more that’s presented to you as a starting point. You don’t seem to
start with a blank coding sheet. You will take maybe a piece of
middleware, and you’ll bolt something on—and what you bolt on can maybe
be half a dozen instructions, but you can end up with something that’s
pretty powerful. So, I think a lot of fun’s gone out of it—my perception
is, anyway.

And I saw that anyway, which is one reason why I moved into security.
And that can be boring—I mean, writing policy is a bit like watching
paint dry\! But, you know, we’ll get a good laugh about something every
day; even if things actually on the section are a bit tough, there’ll
still be something quite funny’ll happen. I mean, we had a big virus
outbreak, as a for-instance, and so . . . The convoluted story about why
we got it: because normally, viruses are trapped at the server, and
they’re trapped at the desktop, but they’re not trapped at the gateway
coming into our office network. But normally stuff coming into our
office network comes from the government secure intranet, which is
great, because that checks out for us. But, we have a link directly with
the NHS, and \the virus is\ coming from the NHS—so they’re sort of
popping up all over the place\! And we had a phone call the other day,
no kidding, from this lady, and she said, you know, “I’ve got this
strange email”—and she wasn’t talking to me, she was talking to somebody
else in the section—this is absolutely true—and he said, “Well, I’ll
come up and have a look at the machine.” Really, we should have just got
the technical people to do it, but he toddled up to see her, and when he
got up there he said, “It’s the Anna Kornikova virus that you’ve got.”
So he said, “I’ll just do a quick check, you know, make sure that
everything’s okay,” and then she said, “You know, I have been feeling a
bit off-color.” \laughs.\ Honest to God, though\! And she said she had
back and shoulder pains. I said \to him\, “What did you do?” and he
said, “Well, I looked at her, but I realized she was really, really
serious, so I just ran away and left her to it\!” \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

So the National Health Service doesn’t check for viruses?

**Wray:**

Well, the NHS is thousands and thousands of employees, and they have a
policy that they should have virus checking in place, but I think that
you could have a doctor’s surgery, for example . . . So we can control
within the five and a half thousand employees that we’ve got, because
they use the office information system; but the NHS has a group of about
half a dozen, if that, people, and so it doesn’t surprise me. It’s
extremely frustrating for us, but there are so many NHS bits and bobs
and odd buildings, and so on, you know, you could have one PC in a
doctor’s surgery, and that could be the source of it. It’s interesting,
though\!

**Abbate:**

Do you have any advice for young women who might be contemplating
computer careers today?

**Wray:**

I’d certainly recommend it as a career. But what I would say also is not
to be frightened to change tack a little during it; don’t get too locked
into just doing one thing. I’m a fine one to talk, because I’m doing IT
security and I have been for a lot of years\! But I think I may have had
more opportunities had I been prepared to move around more—not job-hop,
really, but perhaps not to stay locked into the Civil Service. I think
that I could have probably progressed further. So I think I would
suggest that it’s still an interesting career; and there’s always going
to be a job there; it’s not going to go away. A bit like undertakers, I
suppose, isn’t it? \laughs.\ But to try not to fall into the trap of
staying in one place—one sort of regime, one line of work, even—for too
long, because there are so many different angles to IT that you can try.
You know: look at database design, and design administration; look at
the systems analysis side. I know you need a grounding, but there are
wider areas, I think, and it’s probably very good to try and get a good
cross-section. Project management\! Go for that; give that a try.

Would I come in if I start all over again? Yes, I think I would.
\laughs.\

**Abbate:**

All right, I think I’ll stop there, then. You’ve been really helpful.
Thank you very much\!

Retrieved from
"<http:ethw.orgindex.php?title=Oral-History:Diane_Wray&oldid=108331>"

Categories(Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* Workplace(Category:Workplace "Category:Workplace")
* Profession(Category:Profession "Category:Profession")
* Engineering
  disciplines(Category:Engineering_disciplines "Category:Engineering disciplines")
* Computer
  engineering(Category:Computer_engineering "Category:Computer engineering")
* Engineers(Category:Engineers "Category:Engineers")
* Government(Category:Government "Category:Government")
* Standardization(Category:Standardization "Category:Standardization")
* Telecommunication
  standards(Category:Telecommunication_standards "Category:Telecommunication standards")

## Contents

* 1 About Diane Wray(#About_Diane_Wray)
* 2 About the Interview(#About_the_Interview)
* 3 Copyright Statement(#Copyright_Statement)
* 4 Interview(#Interview)
  * 4\.1 Family and Education(#Family_and_Education)
  * 4\.2 First Job(#First_Job)
  * 4\.3 Working with Computers(#Working_with_Computers)
  * 4\.4 Gender and Work(#Gender_and_Work)
  * 4\.5 Computer Programming at the Electricity
    Board(#Computer_Programming_at_the_Electricity_Board)
  * 4\.6 Joining the Civil Service(#Joining_the_Civil_Service)
  * 4\.7 Security Work for Civil
    Service(#Security_Work_for_Civil_Service)
  * 4\.8 Work for the CCTA(#Work_for_the_CCTA)
  * 4\.9 Balancing Family and Career with Government
    Support(#Balancing_Family_and_Career_with_Government_Support)
  * 4\.10 Gender and Technology Career(#Gender_and_Technology_Career)
  * 4\.11 Overall Enjoyment of Career(#Overall_Enjoyment_of_Career)
  * 4\.12 Mentors and Changes for Women in
    Computing(#Mentors_and_Changes_for_Women_in_Computing)

!Powered by
MediaWiki(resourcesassetspoweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)(www.mediawiki.org)
!Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki(extensionsSemanticMediaWikiincludes..resourcesimagessmw_button.png)(https:www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 21 November 2014, at 10:43\.

* This page has been accessed 2,624 times.

* About ETHW(ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* Policies and disclaimers(ETHW:Policies "ETHW:Policies")

