Toggle navigation   

[ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki](/Main_Page)

* [** Go ****]()
  * [Browse by Subject](/ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * [Encyclopedia](/Encyclopedia)
  
  * [Oral Histories](/Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * [First Hand Histories](/First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * [Landmarks/Milestones](/Landmarks)
  
  * [Archives](/Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * [Education](/ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * [Random page](/Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * [Help](/Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * [Contact us](/Special:Contact)
  
  * 
  * [Recent changes](/Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * [New pages](/Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* [** Actions ****]()
  * [View
    source](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Ruzena_Bajcsy_\(2002\)&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]")
  
  * [History](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Ruzena_Bajcsy_\(2002\)&action=history "Past revisions of this page [h]")
  
  * 
  * [Oral-History](/Oral-History:Ruzena_Bajcsy_\(2002\))
  
  * [Discussion](/index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Ruzena_Bajcsy_\(2002\)&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page [t]")
  
  * 
* [** Tools ****]()
  * [What links
    here](/Special:WhatLinksHere/Oral-History:Ruzena_Bajcsy_\(2002\) "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]")
  
  * [Related
    changes](/Special:RecentChangesLinked/Oral-History:Ruzena_Bajcsy_\(2002\) "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]")
  
  * [Special
    pages](/Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages [q]")
  
  * [Printable
    version](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Ruzena_Bajcsy_\(2002\)&printable=yes "Printable version of this page [p]")
  
  * [Permanent
    link](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Ruzena_Bajcsy_\(2002\)&oldid=108704 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * [Page
    information](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Ruzena_Bajcsy_\(2002\)&action=info)
  
  * [Browse
    properties](/Special:Browse/Oral-2DHistory:Ruzena_Bajcsy_\(2002\))
* [** Account ****](# "Account")
  * [Log
    in](/index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3ARuzena+Bajcsy+%282002%29)
  
  * 
  * [Request account](/Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Ruzena Bajcsy (2002\)

(Redirected from [Oral-History:Ruzena
Bajcsy](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Ruzena_Bajcsy&redirect=no "Oral-History:Ruzena Bajcsy"))

## About Ruzena Bajcsy

[Ruzena Bajcsy](/Ruzena_Bajcsy "Ruzena Bajcsy") was born in 1933 and
grew up in Czechoslovakia. Because of the family's Jewish background,
all of her adult relatives were killed by the Nazis in 1944\. Declared
to be war orphans by the Red Cross, she and her sister remained under
the organization's care until the end of the war. Despite moving between
orphanages and foster parents, Bajcsy had no trouble at school and was a
good student. Determined to have a career in electrical engineering, she
earned a M.S. degree and a Ph.D. degree in the subject from Slovak
Technical University.

Shortly thereafter Bajscy was invited to study the new discipline of
computer science at Stanford University, and so she came to the United
States in 1967\. She planned to stay in the country for one year. On
hearing about the Russian invasion of Prague in 1968, however, Bajcsy
decided not to return to Czechoslovakia. She remained at Stanford until
1972, earning a second Ph.D. degree in computer science there.

For the next thirty years Bajcsy worked at the University of
Pennsylvania, where she was Professor and Chair of Computer Science and
Engineering, as well as Founder and Director of the University of
Pennsylvania's General Robotics and Active Sensory Perception (GRASP)
Laboratory. After leaving Penn, Bajcsy headed the National Science
Foundation's Computer and Information Science and Engineering
Directorate.

Bajscy is currently Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Sciences and Director Emeritus of the Center for Information Technology
Research in the Interest of Science (CITRIS) at the University of
California, Berkeley. There she continues to do innovative research on
machine perception, robotics and artificial intelligence, winning the
2009 Benjamin Franklin Medal in Computer and Cognitive Science for her
recent work.

In this interview, Bajcsy talks about her experiences living, studying
and working in Czechoslovakia and the United States. She discusses the
impact of world events such as the Prague Spring on her educational and
professional decisions. She also outlines the major projects on which
she worked at the University of Pennsylvania, the National Science
Foundation and the University of California, Berkeley. Aside from
looking back at her own work with computers, Bajcsy reflects on the
development of the wider field. Finally, she offers advice for young
women who are considering a career in computing.

## About the Interview

RUZENA BAJCSY: An Interview Conducted by Janet Abbate for the IEEE
History Center, 9 July 2002\.

Interview \#575 for the IEEE History Center, The Institute of Electrical
and Electronic Engineers, Inc.

\

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
the IEEE History Center Oral History Program, IEEE History Center at
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ
07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include identification of
the specific passages to be quoted, anticipated use of the passages, and
identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Ruzena Bajcsy, an oral history conducted in 2002 by Janet Abbate, IEEE
History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

## Interview

INTERVIEW: Ruzena Bajcsy\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: 9 July 2002\
PLACE: Bajcsy's office at the University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, California

### Childhood in Czechoslovakia

**Abbate:**

I want to get your life story again, even though I know some of it. You
were born in Czechoslovakia?

**Bajcsy:**

That’s correct: Bratislava, yes.

**Abbate:**

What year was that?

**Bajcsy:**

1933\. When Hitler came to power, unfortunately. Yes, that was the year.

Let’s see: where do we want to go from there?

**Abbate:**

What did your parents do?

**Bajcsy:**

My father was a civil engineer, and my mother was a teacher.
Unfortunately, she was killed when I was three years old, and then my
father remarried, so I really remember my stepmother more than my own
biological mother. My stepmother was a pediatrician. The second marriage
happened in 1938\. We were Jewish, but then in 1938 we converted—both my
father and myself—to Catholicism; so I remember my own baptism. We lived
in central Slovakia from 1938 or ‘39, in a town called Zvolen. I lived
there until 1946, when I moved back to Bratislava.

My parents and myself were not taken to a concentration camp. We were
converted, but it didn’t really count; we were Jewish as far as the
official government was concerned. The reason we were not taken to a
concentration camp was that my father, as a civil engineer, was needed
for support of the war, to maintain the roads. So we were given a
so-called “presidential exception,” and we were spared being taken to
the concentration camps.

But then, in 1944, there was a partisan uprising. This happened in
August 1944\. Once the uprising was going on, the Slovak fascist
government invited the Nazis—the Germans—to suppress this movement; and
once they came, they didn’t take account of any of the previous
agreements. Subsequently the Nazis—obviously helped by some local
people—came and took my parents, and they were killed in a nearby mass
grave. This was approximately in November or December of 1944\. I was
eleven at that time and my sister seven years younger, and we survived
simply by accident. We were in another room, and the Nazis who came to
take my parents didn’t look in the other room. My mother had just a
moment to step outside and tell me to be quiet and that they were going
to be back—and I never saw them again.

After that, for a week the neighbors fed us; but after one week, they
refused to feed us anymore. So I went to the Red Cross, and the Red
Cross declared us as war orphans, and that’s how we survived the war
until the Russians came to liberate us, in March 1945\.

**Abbate:**

This was a refugee camp kind of thing?

**Bajcsy:**

The Red Cross had some building where they kept orphans and also served
the refugees who were passing through and provided meals and shelter. It
was like a shelter. At the end of the war, nobody survived in my family.
All my uncles and aunts and my grandmother were killed by the Nazis. The
only person who survived was my stepmother’s sister, who lived in
Budapest, who was also a medical doctor. My little sister had problems
with a lack of vitamins, and her skin was completely broken, and she was
in a hospital. After the war, there were newspapers where you could look
for relatives, and so my aunt found out where we were, and because my
sister was so ill, she took her to Budapest—to cure her, basically—and I
stayed in Czechoslovakia. Our separation was meant to be temporary,
because I felt very strongly about my relationship with my sister—it was
more like a mother-child relationship—but unfortunately, it got
postponed; and then in 1948, Stalin closed all the borders, so you
couldn’t travel between Hungary and Czechoslovakia. So my sister grew up
with my aunt, who remarried in between, and I stayed in Czechoslovakia.

I had a pension through my father, so I was financially okay; but in
1947, I think, I moved from this city Zvolen to Bratislava: first to a
Catholic orphanage, and then, after I was fourteen, the Catholic
orphanage would not keep children beyond that age. So my guardians—who
were established by the city, since I had no relatives—took me in, and I
went to gymnasium and to school and lived with them until I got married
when I was twenty-and-a-half. So that’s roughly the quick childhood.

### Education and Early Work Experience

**Bajcsy:**

I was very lucky. I was very good in mathematics, and so I had no
difficulties in gymnasium. I was a good student. When I finished
gymnasium in 1952, a big decision I had to make was which university I
would apply to. In communist countries in those days, if you studied
mathematics, the only job you could have was to be a teacher, and the
condition for being a teacher was that you had to comply to the
government official ideology, which was Marxism and Leninism. I wasn’t
ready to subscribe to that, so I decided to look for the engineering
profession that was the most mathematically inclined, and that was
electrical engineering. So I enrolled in electrical engineering in 1952,
and I got my Masters Degree in 1957\.

**Abbate:**

And that was at the Slovak Technical University?

**Bajcsy:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

Did you have an idea of what you were going to do with that?

**Bajcsy:**

Well, the option with the electrical engineering degree was that you
could go to industry to work, and there were no ideological
preconditions, as opposed to staying in the university. Actually, I got
into trouble: just before I finished, in 1956, there was a little
political thaw in Czechoslovakia. This was after Khrushchev made his
famous speech in which he secretly denounced Stalin. So there was a
student meeting where I spoke about the great tradition of Czechoslovak
education, that we shouldn’t follow the Russian model, that we should
adhere to our own model that had tradition in Jan Amos Comenius
\[Komensky\], who was a great educator in the fifteenth century. That
got me into such trouble that, although I had a Doctoral Fellowship in
mathematics, after I finished my electrical engineering degree I was
condemned as an “enemy of the state” based on this speech, and the
verdict was that I must go to a factory, to get to better know the
working class. So I indeed went to work, and for five years I worked in
an electronics factory, as an engineer.

After that, the computer era came, and the Slovak Technical University
bought one of the first Russian computers, Ural II—which was built from
electronic lamps, not even transistors\! \[both laugh\] So they needed
engineers, and I applied and was accepted; but again, the condition was
that I could not teach, because I would have a bad influence on the
students; but as an engineer I was okay. So I moved from this electronic
industry to being a maintenance engineer at this computing center at the
Slovak Technical University. There I started to work on my Ph.D. thesis,
which they allowed me to do, and I finished my thesis and defended it in
1967\.

**Abbate:**

So that was your first experience with a computer?

**Bajcsy:**

Yes; right.

**Abbate:**

Were you actually programming it?

**Bajcsy:**

Yes, I was programming in hexadecimal code. I mean, there was not even
an assembly language; it was all hexadecimal or binary.

**Abbate:**

Was that cards? Or were you plugging it in?

**Bajcsy:**

No, there were no cards. It was perforated film that we punched holes
in, and that’s how we read the program in. No cards.

**Abbate:**

Was that like the Zuse machines? There was a German machine that used
film.

**Bajcsy:**

Yes? I don’t know that.

That was a machine that had to have very strong air conditioning,
because of the heat that the lamps would put out; and it would break
down almost every hour or so, so you had to reboot it, and clean it, and
cool it. It was a complex device, that’s for sure\! Very small in
comparison to today’s computers; it had a 4096 memory size, and a very
strange length: it had a 33-bit word length\! The Russians wanted to be
different from everybody else\!

**Abbate:**

Right\!

### Coming to the United States

**Bajcsy:**

Right.

Then, in 1967, I got the opportunity to go to America. In between I had
two children; my daughter was born in 1957 and my son in 1964\. I
defended my thesis, and it turned out that I was the first female Ph.D.
in Slovakia in electrical engineering. Anyway, when this opportunity
came, I had to jump all kinds of obstacles, but eventually they let me
go, and the price I paid was that I had to leave the two children behind
me.

**Abbate:**

Did your husband come?

**Bajcsy:**

He came later. I came to Stanford in October 1967, and he came later;
but unfortunately we split, and so he went back and I stayed.

**Abbate:**

You were invited by John McCarthy \[of Stanford University\], right?

**Bajcsy:**

Yes, that’s correct. I owe him a great deal\!

**Abbate:**

Tell me again how he connected up with you?

**Bajcsy:**

Well, he was—I believe this was a year before, in 1966—he was in
Manchester; one of the early computers was built in Manchester by the
English; and my boss, Professor Gvozdiak, got the opportunity to go
there, and so they met there, and John McCarthy said to him that he
would entertain somebody from Gvozdiak’s group, if he would send
somebody to Stanford for studies. Initially, I really had all the
intentions to go back after a year. But then, unfortunately, the
Russians moved into Czechoslovakia in ‘68, and so when I saw that, I
decided not to go back.

**Abbate:**

So you stayed and got another Ph.D.

**Bajcsy:**

In ’72, right.

**Abbate:**

And that would have been computer science at that time?

**Bajcsy:**

That was in computer science.

**Abbate:**

What was your second Ph.D. on?

**Bajcsy:**

The second Ph.D. was in computer vision, on texture recognition. It was
recognition of visual patterns, repetitive kinds of patterns.

**Abbate:**

Had you already been interested in A.I./robotics kinds of things?

**Bajcsy:**

Well, my first Ph.D., in electrical engineering, was actually on
learning machines, Markovian processes and learning machines; so I
always was interested in: How can you use mathematics and the new
insights that you get from technology for explaining some behavior,
human behavior? As I read mathematics, which I loved very much—still
love—I simultaneously was always very interested in psychology; so I was
kind of amateurishly reading psychology. So it was rather natural for me
to think about. And vision is a fascinating modality. How do you extract
all this information from the rays that fall on your eye? It’s the most
complex sense, the most challenging. Can you explain it in a mechanistic
fashion? I mean, that’s really the issue.

**Abbate:**

And can you?

**Bajcsy:**

Well, we are, more and more; yes. I believe that eventually we will. I
really believe that, as mysterious as it looks, it’s explainable.

### The Environment at Stanford

**Abbate:**

What was it like coming to Stanford and to the United States?

**Bajcsy:**

Well, as you can imagine: I came in 1967, in the middle of the hippie
movement, and it was fascinating. Of course, I came from this very
conservative Czechoslovakian, communist, and in some ways very Catholic
background—very, very conservative background; the whole environment was
rather conservative. So, it was a tremendous eye-opener of
possibilities. I was very moved when I came for the first time to the
Stanford book store, and on the same shelf I saw the Bible, the Koran,
and Marx-Engels next to each other\! To me, this was a testimonial to
what freedom is really all about. And then, the whole hippie movement
was, in many regards, very idealistic. You know, the students at
Stanford were not poor students; they came from middle-class families;
but they were asking, “What is all this materialism for? Is this good
for you?” and so forth. So I very much related to those ideals.
Unfortunately, then it kind of got corrupted by the drug use and the
violence and all that. But it was very exciting and elevating. I was
very elevated. I just felt that suddenly I had shed a big burden that I
felt, and constraints I found, in the old country, due to various
conditions—as I said, the general environment was just terribly
conservative, and I was an outsider. I was an independent thinker, and
in those conservative societies that’s not very much tolerated, you
know.

I used to joke that I was a triple minority: I was Jewish; I was a
female scientist; and I was Slovak, which is a minority in
Czechoslovakia. I really felt like an outsider. And I regret to say that
I have no real desire to go back, although I appreciate a lot of the
culture of my old country; but it’s just too small-thinking. Even today,
it’s very bourgeois, and now, of course, everyone’s looking out for the
materialistic things. Of course, you need a certain standard of living
to be comfortable, but beyond that, this quest for more things doesn’t
appeal to me. If I am greedy, I am greedy after knowledge. I want to
know more. I always feel that there’s just not enough time to learn
enough.

**Abbate:**

Did you feel that at Stanford, you were a minority in terms of being a
female engineer?

**Bajcsy:**

No, no. At Stanford, I was really embraced. Yes, I had in the beginning
tremendous difficulties because my English skills were not as good as
they should have been. Also, although I was trained in the engineering
mathematics, I really didn’t know the discrete mathematics, which
computer scientists use, so I had to really pick up that. As you can
imagine, as you get older, it’s harder to pick up new mathematics, and I
was ten years senior, at least in age, to my student colleagues. So it
wasn’t that easy; but I loved it, and it gave me tremendous insight, and
John McCarthy was very supportive of me.

It was a very exciting environment. The new ideas: there was no limit to
new ideas, and that was very exciting\! Remember, it was also a time
when the whole area of computer science was still in diapers, so to
speak, and artificial intelligence was just being born. We were all very
naive; we oversimplified the problems; but we were terribly excited\!
Now the field, of course, is much more mature. We are a little more
realistic about what can be done, but I think we also brought in more
scientific methodology—you know, old-fashioned engineering
methodology—which in those days was not there. You’d try anything, and
everything was new. It brought in, also, all kinds of flaky people; it
was a combination of thinkers but also some flaky people.

**Abbate:**

So you would have been thirty-nine or thereabouts when you finished at
Stanford?

**Bajcsy:**

Right.

### The GRASP Lab at Penn

**Abbate:**

And then you got the job at Penn?

**Bajcsy:**

Penn, right. I was an Assistant Professor there. I started to build my
image processing laboratory, and then, little by little, I expanded it
to a robotics lab, and that’s how the GRASP Lab was born. GRASP stands
for “General Robotics and Active Sensory Perception.” That was in 1978,
just after I got my tenure.

**Abbate:**

Now, you have a theory about robotics in the sense of the active . . .

**Bajcsy:**

Active perception, yes. That was a turning point. Until then, the way a
lot of auditory or visual measurements were taken was that measurements
were taken in, and then processed, and then the machine would spit out
the output. And I argued that perception is not that you take it in,
close your eyes, process, and then you say “Oh\! This is a table.” I
argued that it’s an active process. My favorite sentences were, “We
don’t see; we look”; and “We don’t touch; we feel”—which is an active
process. In some sense, that came to me very naturally; because again,
in my electrical engineering, I was a control engineer, and control
engineers view the world as a feedback process. So when I thought about
these things, I really combined the signal processing with the active
process of acquisition.

**Abbate:**

So how does that translate in terms of a robot?

**Bajcsy:**

Well, it depends on how you define what a robot is. A robot is a
mechanism that takes data and does something with it, but also interacts
with the world, with the environment. So the fact that I professed
actively interacting with the environment as you perceive meant
inevitably that I had to deal with the mechanisms that did that, which
were robots.

**Abbate:**

So to be active, you have to be embodied and interacting with the
environment?

**Bajcsy:**

Well, you have to have some mechanisms, like motors. I mean, if you
think about it, your neck, and your head movement, and your eye
movements, are all motorically controlled.

**Abbate:**

It seems like a philosophical difference from a more idealistic point of
view that you can be disembodied and very abstract and still perceive.

**Bajcsy:**

Right.

**Abbate:**

So you started a whole lab at Penn doing that?

**Bajcsy:**

Right.

### Teaching at Penn

**Abbate:**

What was it like teaching there?

**Bajcsy:**

I have to tell you that I never was a very good large-classroom teacher,
and maybe it’s partly my nature. The large-classroom teaching is very
theatrical—you have to entertain the students to keep their
attention—and that’s not my style. I’m much more matter-of-fact: “Here
are the facts. Here is why,” and so forth and so on. So I didn’t succeed
on that score, and I’m much better off interacting on a personal level
with the students: a small classroom, and even better, one-to-one. I
have some great Ph.D. students, about fifty of them, who are all over
the world. I enjoy very much the sort of interaction where they
challenge me, and I have to, on the whiteboard or the blackboard, defend
my arguments or challenge them. So on that score I am much better and
much more successful.

Another problem I have is that, coming from Europe—remember, I taught
before I came to America—there was a very different philosophy of
university. Namely, the idea was that when you came to university, you
knew what you wanted to do, and you were self-motivated, and so the
classes were kind of just recounting what the subject matter was. It was
up to you—at least in Czechoslovakia, the burden was on the students to
challenge the teacher: Why this? Why that?” In America, the first three
years, especially, are more like what the gymnasium used to be in
Czechoslovakia. Very structured: “Here is the lecture. Here is the
homework”; everything is very well-structured and controlled. I had a
hard time adjusting to that. I find it terribly boring\! You go through
that; every year, the same thing. Besides, the subject matter that I
taught, which was computer vision, was evolving so much that every year
was different; so I sort of would make up lectures as I went, and so
they were not as nicely structured, and the American students were not
too happy with that. But as I said, I was very successful with my Ph.D.
students, and that’s where my strength is, really: to see, challenge
people, push them to a higher horizon, dream big. Yes.

### The Environment at Penn

**Abbate:**

Was that a welcoming environment at Penn?

**Bajcsy:**

Well, let me put it in this way: My colleagues did not put up any
obstacles. They didn’t prevent me from doing anything. But they were not
of great help. Later, there was one man whom I really owe quite a bit,
and his name is Joe Bordogna. He was first a colleague in electrical
engineering, and then he became the Dean, and he really was very
supportive. But the rest of my colleagues were indifferent, let’s put it
this way.

**Abbate:**

Was that because you’re a woman? Or they weren’t interested in your
subject?

**Bajcsy:**

Well, I think it was: They wanted to see what I could do. I mean, in
academia, by and large, you are on your own. It’s only lately where some
of us are so concerned about the junior faculty, to help them and so
forth. But in the old days, this was not the case. “Here is the water.
Swim\!”

**Abbate:**

So that was just the normal environment.

**Bajcsy:**

Very normal; very normal. “Show what you can do\!”

**Abbate:**

But if you did well, then . . .

**Bajcsy:**

Oh, yes, they were very happy. Sure. As I said, the positive thing is
that they didn’t put any obstacles in front of me. But I didn’t feel
that they were a great help. There was one man with whom I talked more
than others, Aravind Joshi. He was a dear colleague and friend, and so
we would talk, but he was in a different area; he was in natural
language processing.

There was a little bit of suspicion: “What can a woman do?”

**Abbate:**

How many women were there in the department?

**Bajcsy:**

\[Points to herself\]

**Abbate:**

Just you\! You were the first?

**Bajcsy:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

Wow. So I’m sure there was some skepticism.

**Bajcsy:**

A little bit, yes. “What can she do? Will she fall apart?”

**Abbate:**

Were there a lot of women students?

**Bajcsy:**

No. Remember, this was ‘72\. Typically for engineering, you know, there
were few women.

**Abbate:**

That’s right, because at Penn, computer science is in the Engineering
school.

**Bajcsy:**

Right. Later on, women would come to databases and computer science;
certain aspects of computer science. But robotics doesn’t attract too
many women, either, even today. I call this the “screwdriver problem.”
You know, it’s not viewed as feminine to have a screwdriver in your
hand\! Things are changing—your generation is definitely much better off
in expectations and perception—but it’s still an uphill battle.

**Abbate:**

Yes.

**Bajcsy:**

Would you agree?

**Abbate:**

Yes. I mean, the numbers look that way, too. There are still not very
many women engineers.

### Favorite Projects at Penn

**Abbate:**

What were some of your favorite projects at Penn?

**Bajcsy:**

What do you mean?

**Abbate:**

Well, you were there thirty years, so you must have worked on a lot of
different projects.

**Bajcsy:**

All different\! Yes, yes. Well, one of the things I’m proud of is the
development of an anatomy atlas: a digital anatomy atlas of the brain.

**Abbate:**

I didn’t know that.

**Bajcsy:**

Subsequently we developed software that matched this atlas with the
computer tomographic images, and later on with MRI images and positron
emission tomographic images and all these imaging systems. In fact, I’m
still very much interested in that problem. Right now I don’t do
anything along those lines, but that’s a very important work.

**Abbate:**

So was that a functional map of the brain?

**Bajcsy:**

Anatomic. Anatomy, not function. The functional is different. We were
taking the anatomy—which for every person is slightly different, so we
customized to your brain— and then took the functional images and
projected them on the anatomy, so that you can label the functional
areas in terms of the anatomic labels.

**Abbate:**

I see.

**Bajcsy:**

But the important thing later on was to understand what is so-called
“normal anatomy,” as opposed to abnormal: because there is natural
variation, so what is that natural variation? So I spent some time on
that, and a former student of mine is still working on that.

So that was one project. We had several. Within this paradigm of active
perception, we built a system for automatic focusing, zooming, and
deciding where to turn your head. I had a very nice project on combining
visual information with tactile (grasping) information. We had a very
interesting project on cooperative robots: robots that work together,
and look at each other, and avoid obstacles, and meet again somewhere.

**Abbate:**

It sounds fun\!

**Bajcsy:**

Oh, yes\! Yes, I had a lot of fun doing it.

### Head of CISE at NSF

**Abbate:**

Now, when I met you in December 2000, you were at NSF \[National Science
Foundation\], as Head of CISE \[Computer and Information Science and
Engineering Directorate\].

**Bajcsy:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

And how was that experience?

**Bajcsy:**

Oh, it was wonderful\! I was very lucky there, because I had two people
that I really enjoyed working with. One is the Director, Rita Colwell. I
really clicked with her, and I really enjoyed that; we still are good
friends. And the other one, her Deputy, is Joe Bordogna; he’s the man
who used to be the Dean at Penn, and we are very good friends. They were
both very helpful. But, in general, also, there were some other people
that I enjoyed interacting with. It was a very good experience for me.
And it was the time when we got more money, so that helped bring
success—it always helps—so I was able to implement some of my ideas in
this information technology research program, which still is going on;
so that’s very gratifying.

**Abbate:**

What kinds of ideas were you trying to promote?

**Bajcsy:**

First of all, I tried to promote large projects in computer science. You
see, until then, NSF was supporting small projects—you know, one P.I. or
two P.I.s—and giving out a hundred fifty thousand dollars or so in
grants. I saw the effect on myself, that you got your grant and you
immediately had to start writing another proposal, so it was really
wasted. So with this new money, I installed a five-year program and more
money, larger groups; because I found that the field is moving towards
that kind of investigation. I also looked and learned quite a bit about
this interaction of bio- and information technology: how you model
things, and what kind of computation biology is doing; what can we learn
from biology? That was very interesting. I also had to learn a little
bit about quantum computing, because that was one of the projects we
started under my Directorship. And then, just before I left, I pushed
for a big networking infrastructure that would connect the
supercomputers with large memory sets, called “cyberinfrastructure”; so
hopefully there will be new money for that.

### CITRIS at Berkeley

**Abbate:**

Now, how did you end up here at Berkeley?

**Bajcsy:**

Well, after I finished my stay at NSF, I went back to Penn, and I was
ready to retire—my husband, especially, wanted me to retire—and then
this institute was awarded by Governor Davis.

**Abbate:**

CITRIS?

**Bajcsy:**

CITRIS, right. Professor \[Randy\] Katz was the Director of this
institute, and sometime during that summer he indicated that he really
didn’t want to continue being the Director. So they were looking for a
new Director, and they contacted me and they asked, Would I be
interested? So—after negotiating with my husband, you know—I applied,
and I got the job.

**Abbate:**

Is your husband also a computer scientist?

**Bajcsy:**

No, he’s a physicist. He’s retired.

**Abbate:**

Now, CITRIS is the Center for Information Technology Research in the
Interest of Society. What is that?

**Bajcsy:**

Well, it’s being formed, you know; it’s an evolving institute. But
fundamentally, what it is is: There are certain information technology
technologies out there. This faculty of ninety is working on various
aspects of small sensor nets, large databases, architectures, web,
networking—you know, all these technologies. So that’s on one hand. On
the other hand, you have many applications—energy conservation,
environmental monitoring, health care, education, transportation,
homeland security—that all require some or all of these technologies. So
this institute is about, “How do you make, test, and integrate these
technologies for these different applications?”

**Abbate:**

Do you have to bring people together from the technology and application
sides?

**Bajcsy:**

That is really the hard part. Yes. How do you bring them together? So
one of the things that I am trying to do—painfully—is to build large
test beds for, let’s say, monitoring energy in a big building, or
monitoring the environment outdoors; and then I’m hoping that, once I
have these, I can bring the social scientists and say, “Look, here is a
big laboratory. You can look at the privacy issues, or the regulatory
issues,” and stuff like that.

There is another application that I am kind of struggling with. A lot of
the humanists have digitized data sets out there—the museum collections;
text; and they use a lot of big digital libraries—and they are
disconnected. So the question is, “How can we bring them together?” So
that if you are a student and you want to do research, or you want to
take a course in Greek history, or Egyptology, or something—in these
days you have much more material on the Web to document all of this . .
. .

**Abbate:**

So you would do something to make that more accessible?

**Bajcsy:**

Well, that’s what I’m trying, yes; but it’s not easy.

**Abbate:**

No.

**Bajcsy:**

Right. That’s what I would like to do, but right now I’ve just
identified who these people are, and now I’m just trying to see how I
can integrate them.

**Abbate:**

How big is CITRIS? I mean, in terms of people?

**Bajcsy:**

It’s fluid. But some are more visible than others.

**Abbate:**

They’re affiliated, but not necessarily doing this full time?

**Bajcsy:**

Right. Well, none of them are; I mean, very few are full-time. I am
full-time, and a few colleagues are full-time, but by and large, all the
rest are faculty with normal responsibilities.

### On Raising Children

**Abbate:**

How many children do you have?

**Bajcsy:**

Two. Well, I have three, actually, because my third child is my
stepchild from my husband’s first marriage. But we don’t have any
children together. The two children are from my first marriage, and his
son is from his first marriage.

**Abbate:**

Did your two children stay in Czechoslovakia?

**Bajcsy:**

No, no, no. They live in Urbana-Champaign.

**Abbate:**

How old were they when they came to the U.S.?

**Bajcsy:**

Oh, they came after the wall came down—you know, the Berlin Wall came
down. My daughter came in 1990, and my son came, I think, in ‘91 or
‘92\.

**Abbate:**

But they were already grown up, obviously.

**Bajcsy:**

Oh, yes\! Right.

**Abbate:**

So you weren’t actually raising children while you were working?

**Bajcsy:**

No, actually; they grew up with their father.

**Abbate:**

And you’re husband’s child . . .

**Bajcsy:**

Oh, yes; I was raising his child.

**Abbate:**

Was that difficult, balancing that with your work?

**Bajcsy:**

Well, I came into his life when he was seven, so he was already in
school, so not really. I mean, frankly, we shared the child care. The
teenage years were a little difficult. They were more difficult because
I was labeled the “European Mother,” you know, so I kind of took a back
seat in many regards, and I was more a conciliator between him and his
father. It was really his father who was in the front line raising him.

### On Mentoring

**Abbate:**

Did you have any mentors or role models when you were thinking about
what career to go into?

**Bajcsy:**

Well, you know, in some ways I grew up in a family where it was given,
taken for granted, that you earn your living, that you don’t get married
to be supported by your husband. I guess my inclinations towards
engineering and science come from my father, who was a civil engineer. I
admired him and adored him immensely. On the other hand, my independence
and such came from my mother, who was also a professional and quite
independent lady.

When I was very young, I think I admired very much Madame Curie. But
later on, I guess I just went by my own steam. There is a dear friend
whom I admire quite a bit, but I met her much later. She’s twenty years
older than I am, and she’s a prominent biochemist: Mildred Cohn. I have
tremendous respect for her.

### On Working with Computers

**Abbate:**

What do you find most satisfying about working with computers?

**Bajcsy:**

\[laughs\] Well, they do what you say\! It’s the predictability. It’s
very comforting, you know. With people: people are unpredictable. With
machines, you know what you get; and if you don’t get what you want, you
know it’s your fault\! \[laughs\] So somehow you have control. With
people—your husband, your children, your colleagues—you have very little
control; you can only beg them to behave. With machines, as I said, they
do what you program them to do, and if they don’t do the right thing,
then you can blame yourself. So I think that’s it.

At the same time, I will tell you—I gave some lectures on this
subject—that computers, unlike all other machines, can serve in some
ways as an extender of your imagination. Because the space of
possibilities is so much bigger than your own head, or on your paper,
that you can really explore a much bigger world and play with many
different combinations. That’s certainly a tool that hasn’t been used
yet, fully. Just think about the wealth of information that is on the
Web. It’s immense\! You never could keep it on your books, even if you
had an encyclopedia that filled this room. Of course, there’s a lot of
trash, too; but nevertheless, it’s a machine that will allow you to
really create a much bigger world of possibilities.

**Abbate:**

How do you think the field has changed in the time you’ve been in your
area of computing?

**Bajcsy:**

Oh, the scale has changed\! I mean, it’s Moore’s Law. And therefore, it
enables you to do things on a much bigger scale than ever before. The
bad thing is that it also encourages sloppiness. In the old days, we had
to think very carefully about how much memory you used, how much
processing time you used, and so you had to really think about your
algorithms carefully, in order to fit it into the machine and to make it
work. Today, brute-force kinds of algorithms will do just fine, because
you have enough memory and you have enough processing speed. So in that
sense, that promotes sloppiness. But I think overall, the scale of
problems you can solve is just much larger.

**Abbate:**

Do you have any advice for young women who are thinking of going into
computing?

**Bajcsy:**

I would say, on the positive side, computing is really ideal for women,
even those who want to have a family—because you can scale down; you can
do it part-time; you can do telecommuting. So it’s an ideal job for
women, even if they need to scale down because of the family situation.
At the same time, if you really want to climb up in the career, there is
no easy way out. You have to have the commitment, and the world is very
competitive, and it moves fast—you have to be willing to learn all the
time. You have to be really committed, time-wise. So it depends on what
you want. I mean, it’s not accidental that Mrs. \[Carly\] Fiorina, for
example, who is the CEO of HP, has no children; and women like her. Or
they have to have grown-up children or something, like myself. I mean, I
can really devote all my waking hours to this work. But so do men\! So
it’s the same.

**Abbate:**

Well, thank you so much for talking with me again\!

**Bajcsy:**

Okay\! Good, good\!

Retrieved from
"<http://ethw.org/index.php?title=Oral-History:Ruzena_Bajcsy_(2002)&oldid=108704>"

[Categories](/Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* [Robots](/Category:Robots "Category:Robots")
* [Computing and
  electronics](/Category:Computing_and_electronics "Category:Computing and electronics")
* [Computational and artificial
  intelligence](/Category:Computational_and_artificial_intelligence "Category:Computational and artificial intelligence")
* [Engineering
  education](/Category:Engineering_education "Category:Engineering education")

## Contents

* [1 About Ruzena Bajcsy](#About_Ruzena_Bajcsy)
* [2 About the Interview](#About_the_Interview)
* [3 Copyright Statement](#Copyright_Statement)
* [4 Interview](#Interview)
  * [4\.1 Childhood in Czechoslovakia](#Childhood_in_Czechoslovakia)
  * [4\.2 Education and Early Work
    Experience](#Education_and_Early_Work_Experience)
  * [4\.3 Coming to the United States](#Coming_to_the_United_States)
  * [4\.4 The Environment at Stanford](#The_Environment_at_Stanford)
  * [4\.5 The GRASP Lab at Penn](#The_GRASP_Lab_at_Penn)
  * [4\.6 Teaching at Penn](#Teaching_at_Penn)
  * [4\.7 The Environment at Penn](#The_Environment_at_Penn)
  * [4\.8 Favorite Projects at Penn](#Favorite_Projects_at_Penn)
  * [4\.9 Head of CISE at NSF](#Head_of_CISE_at_NSF)
  * [4\.10 CITRIS at Berkeley](#CITRIS_at_Berkeley)
  * [4\.11 On Raising Children](#On_Raising_Children)
  * [4\.12 On Mentoring](#On_Mentoring)
  * [4\.13 On Working with Computers](#On_Working_with_Computers)

[![Powered by
MediaWiki](/resources/assets/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)](//www.mediawiki.org/)
[![Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki](/extensions/SemanticMediaWiki/includes/../resources/images/smw_button.png)](https://www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 21 November 2014, at 10:49\.

* This page has been accessed 13,324 times.

* [About ETHW](/ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* [Policies and disclaimers](/ETHW:Policies "ETHW:Policies")

