Toggle navigation   

ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki(Main_Page)

* ** Go ****()
  * Browse by Subject(ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * Encyclopedia(Encyclopedia)
  
  * Oral Histories(Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * First Hand Histories(First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * LandmarksMilestones(Landmarks)
  
  * Archives(Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * Education(ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * Random page(Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * Help(Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * Contact us(Special:Contact)
  
  * 
  * Recent changes(Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * New pages(Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* ** Actions ****()
  * View
    source(index.php?title=Oral-History:Marlene_Hazle&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source e")
  
  * History(index.php?title=Oral-History:Marlene_Hazle&action=history "Past revisions of this page h")
  
  * 
  * Oral-History(Oral-History:Marlene_Hazle)
  
  * Discussion(index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Marlene_Hazle&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page t")
  
  * 
* ** Tools ****()
  * What links
    here(Special:WhatLinksHereOral-History:Marlene_Hazle "A list of all wiki pages that link here j")
  
  * Related
    changes(Special:RecentChangesLinkedOral-History:Marlene_Hazle "Recent changes in pages linked from this page k")
  
  * Special
    pages(Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages q")
  
  * Printable
    version(index.php?title=Oral-History:Marlene_Hazle&printable=yes "Printable version of this page p")
  
  * Permanent
    link(index.php?title=Oral-History:Marlene_Hazle&oldid=108611 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * Page
    information(index.php?title=Oral-History:Marlene_Hazle&action=info)
  
  * Browse properties(Special:BrowseOral-2DHistory:Marlene_Hazle)
* ** Account ****(# "Account")
  * Log
    in(index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3AMarlene+Hazle)
  
  * 
  * Request account(Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Marlene Hazle

## About Marlene Hazle

Marlene Hazle grew up in Toledo, Ohio and matriculated at Cornell
University, where she worked with an early computer system there. After
graduating with a degree in government, she moved to Boston to work with
the RAND Corporation on their SAGE system. She worked to train new in
the SAGE system, and then moved to MITRE to help construct the basics of
the first automated air traffic controller system. At MITRE she was also
involved in constructing tactical warfare systems for the Air Force and
developing internal-use software and specifications.

In this interview, Hazle discusses the development of distributed
computer systems, the benefits and problems of working for government
contractors, and the benefits of the widespread sharing of codes.

## About the Interview

Marlene Hazle: An Interview Conducted by Janet Abbate for the IEEE
History Center, 11 February 2001\.

Interview \#601 for the IEEE History Center, The Institute of Electrical
and Electronic Engineers, Inc.

\

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
the IEEE History Center Oral History Program, IEEE History Center at
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ
07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include identification of
the specific passages to be quoted, anticipated use of the passages, and
identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Marlene Hazle, an oral history conducted in 2001 by Janet Abbate, IEEE
History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

\

## Interview

INTERVIEW: Marlene Hazle\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: 11 February 2001\
PLACE: Hazle's home in Lexington, MA

\

### Family and Educational Background

**Janet Abbate:**

This is an interview with Marlene Hazle on February 11th, 2001\.

To start, can you tell me when you were born and where you grew up?

**Marlene Hazle:**

I was born in 1934 in Toledo, Ohio, where I lived until I went to
college. I went to a public high school, the Thomas A. De Vilbiss High
School, and decided that I wanted to go East to a large, coeducational
college with high academic standards, and at that time, Cornell
University was the only place that fit those requirements. So I went to
Cornell. I started out actually thinking I was going to be a physics
major, and took physics and a lot of mathematics and sciences like
chemistry, but along the way decided that I didn’t want to pursue
physics, and ultimately ended up with a degree in government. That was
one of the strong departments at Cornell at that time, and I think it
still is, and I became interested in that.

But along the way, as I said, I had taken a lot of math; and the way
that I got started in computing was through a professor who taught
numerical analysis, and said that if anyone in the class wanted to learn
how to use a computer to do the fairly laborious homework that was
involved in numerical analysis, he would be happy to show us how to do
that. And so a few of us in the class took him up on it, and went to
learn how to use an IBM computer that was in one of the engineering
buildings at Cornell. I actually don’t remember that I used it very much
to do the homework, but I thought it was interesting. And this man was
well-connected in that very early computing community, and so he passed
out the names of the students who had taken him up on learning how to
run the—it was the Card-Programmed Computer. And as a result, we
received invitations to be interviewed, and it was as a result of that
that I was interviewed by the Rand Corporation, which was pretty much at
the beginning of its work on the SAGE system, and went to work for the
Rand Corporation on the SAGE system in 1956\.

**Janet Abbate:**

Let me back up a little. What did your parents do for a living?

**Marlene Hazle:**

My father was a mechanical engineer, and my mother was a teacher for a
short time before she was married, and after that she did not work. So I
was exposed to¬—certainly the notion that I was going to go to college
and learn how to do something; have a career.

**Janet Abbate:**

That was—they really—that was understood?

**Marlene Hazle:**

That was understood.

**Janet Abbate:**

Did you have brothers and sisters?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Two brothers. Neither one of them, though—pursued an engineering degree,
which of course would have made my father very happy; so I was—I’m sort
of his engineer.

**Janet Abbate:**

Interesting.

**Marlene Hazle:**

My older brother is an orthodontist, and my younger brother owns his own
plastics manufacturing plant—business. So I was the one that sort of did
the scientific thing in our family.

**Janet Abbate:**

How early did you get interested in science?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Oh, I guess I was always interested in science; I took all the science
that I could take in my high school. I can’t say that I was really
focused then; I always liked just about every subject that I took. So,
it was—I hate to say this, but it was easy for me.

**Janet Abbate:**

What’s wrong with that?

**Marlene Hazle:**

It was easy. I think that had something to do with . . . And I liked the
preciseness of it. I liked the fact that a mathematical problem was
either correctly done or not correctly done; and the same in the physics
and the chemistry: You’d understood the equations and how they worked,
or you didn’t. Well, I think that that’s what pushed me towards the more
scientific interests, as opposed to the humanities.

**Janet Abbate:**

Did you already know when you went to Cornell that you wanted to do
something in science?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Well, as I said, I went thinking that I was going to be a physics major.
And I enjoyed the physics; I did well; but I guess I honestly thought
that I didn’t want to commit myself to going through a Ph.D. program.
And it seemed to me that in order to be anything in the field of
physics, you really had to do that.

Actually, would you believe that my first advisor at Cornell was Hans
Bethe?

**Janet Abbate:**

No\! So that was a pretty high standard to live up to.

**Marlene Hazle:**

Right\! It was a high standard\! \laughs.\ Actually, I only saw him
once\!

But I guess I always had it in my mind that I was going to do something
in the mathematical or scientific area.

**Janet Abbate:**

You used that first computer in a class at Cornell. Was that enjoyable?
I don’t know how well you remember that.

### Looking for Work

**Marlene Hazle:**

Actually, as I say, I don’t remember how much I did. I thought it was
interesting, and understandable. I actually tried to get a job—this was
in my junior year—I tried to get a job that summer in Cleveland, where
my family lived by this time, having moved from Toledo; but I couldn’t
find anybody who cared that I knew what a computer was at the time, so I
didn’t\! But I certainly, once I began interviewing for jobs in my
senior year—with Rand, with IBM—I was convinced that that’s what I
wanted to do. It was new, and interesting, and it just seemed appealing.
It also paid very well . . . surprisingly enough. Computer—people who
knew anything about computers were very scarce in those days, as you can
well imagine; so the salary was quite impressive.

**Janet Abbate:**

Compared to other things you could get with a math degree?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Well, I didn’t actually—I mean, I’d graduated with no math degree, but
I’d graduated with a degree in government. But, compared to what men
in the engineering schools were getting, it was a good salary. It was a
better salary.

**Janet Abbate:**

Really? So it was better than engineering\!

**Marlene Hazle:**

Yes.

**Janet Abbate:**

Great\! So what were the job interviews like?

**Marlene Hazle:**

The people who interviewed me for the Rand Corporation described what
the SAGE System was, because that’s what they were hiring for. . . .
They were basically selling me on taking the job, because they needed
people, and I at least knew what a computer was, and that was a big step
upwards for them. And I actually had decided to come to Boston with
three friends, and so it was located where I wanted to be—which was a
major draw.

**Janet Abbate:**

Just for interest you wanted to come to Boston?

**Marlene Hazle:**

These three friends and I decided we wanted to live in a big city where
none of our families lived—where none of us had grown up, really—and
start out on our careers together. And that’s what we did. And we picked
Boston because it was, and it still is, an interesting city, and none of
us had come from Boston—or New England, as a matter of fact. We were
from mostly the Midwest; three of us from the Midwest and one from New
York City.

The interview with IBM was interesting. We were flown to New York City.
After an initial interview on campus we were flown to New York City, to
some—the IBM headquarters someplace in the city—and entertained royally.
But . . . . I was disappointed. Actually one of the other friends (of
the three) also was in the same class, had done the same thing I did,
and was also interviewing for a computer job. So the two of us were
flown down there, entertained royally; but we were unhappy to learn that
the only kind of job they were wanting to offer us was what they called
the System Service Girl, which was, at that time, wiring plugboards that
controlled the operations of the computers, such as the Card-Programmed
computer.

**Janet Abbate:**

So you would go . . .

**Marlene Hazle:**

And you would go change the program by rewiring these boards for the
customers when they wanted to do something different, or when they had a
problem. But I guess we both thought that we wanted to something more
challenging than that, and so both of us actually started to—chose to
come with Rand, and to work in the Boston area.

**Janet Abbate:**

So, at IBM, if you had been men, they would have offered you a different
position?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Well that was our assumption\! I can’t be certain that that’s true.

**Janet Abbate:**

Did any men that you knew interview there?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Oh no, we were the only two people being interviewed, and we were—not
part of a group in any sense. But the message was, “This is what women
do here.” Well, that may have just been that office or that group of
people who happened to be interviewing; I can’t assert that it was a
more widespread attitude\! \laughs.\ But that was our experience.

### Starting at RAND

**Janet Abbate:**

You started your first job at Rand—did you say when that was?

**Marlene Hazle:**

It was in the Fall of 1956\. We went to the programming class; and that,
of course, was what you had to do initially, because they had this new
SAGE computer, which was different from any other computer, certainly
different from the one that we had worked on at Cornell. And then I
actually went into training immediately. The job of Rand—one of the jobs
of the Rand Corporation was to hire and train people to go to the SAGE
centers—air defense centers—when they were opened around the country,
and do the maintenance of the software: maintain the software, fix it,
do the upgrades, whatever was required.

So they had to develop a training program here at the MIT Lincoln Labs.
And it just so happened that as a part of our programming class—or at
the end of our programming class, I should say—each person, or each
couple of people—basically each person—was given one of the SAGE
programs that had already been written; and the task was to understand
it by reading the code, and then document it so that other people could
understand it without sitting down and going through the laborious job
of reading and understanding the code—because in order to do that, you
really had to understand the application, which in the case of SAGE was
very complicated and not familiar to many people. And I happened to be
given the code for the operating system—or the executive; that was
before the term “operating system” was in use—for the SAGE system, to
understand and to document. Well of course, it made a lot of sense for
people who were going out to maintain the SAGE software in the field to
have some understanding of how all the different pieces of software fit
together and are controlled by the executive. And so I developed a
course in how that system worked and taught it to the subsequent
trainees—hirees—who came in to Lincoln Labs and then subsequently went
out to the SAGE centers to help maintain the software.

**Janet Abbate:**

Was that your idea, to develop the course?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Uh . . . no; it was not my idea. There was actually a person who had
sort of started to do that, and I took it over from him, because he went
off to one of the SAGE centers when they started opening them up, and I
preferred to stay in the Boston area, having made this big commitment to
come to Boston and live. So I was the one that took that over and
developed it, and developed another course that had to do with how you
start the machine up in the first place, and how you recover if the
system goes down—which of course it did frequently in those days\!
\laughs\

**Janet Abbate:**

That’s interesting. All of the things you mention—the documenting, and
error recovery, and so forth—all those things we know are necessary, but
often it seems like after the fact they decide they need someone to do
those things. Were those new endeavors, in the sense that no one had
really thought, “Well, how do you recover when the computer crashes?” in
a systematic way?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Oh, well I think that the people who were designing the SAGE
software—and the hardware, because there were things built into the
hardware to facilitate recovery—they had given it a great deal of
thought. SAGE was the first real-time, large computer system, so many of
those things were new, I’m sure, to the people who were sitting around
and specifying the requirements for that software. And those
requirements were very thoroughly documented. We looked back at the
requirements for the SAGE system: it’s amazing, the level of detail at
which the requirements were documented; and the software was written
from those very detailed specifications. And when someone like me wanted
to understand the executive, I just had to go back to the specifications
for it—and then, of course, push a little harder to find out why the
specifications were what they were.

I think that what was interesting was that somebody decided—realized
that for the people to do the maintenance out in the field—and there
were to be thirty-two SAGE sites, so we were talking about many people
to do that—a description of the operation of the software in the SAGE
system had to be in a more readable form than the specifications were.
And also, just one level more detailed than the specifications were. And
that’s how—why—that was one of the tasks of the Rand Corporation: to
have the trainees document the software initially, and then make it
available to the people who came after them.

**Janet Abbate:**

Were you doing training as long as you were at Rand?

### Creating the Air Traffic Control System

**Marlene Hazle:**

Yes, actually I was. In the fall of 1957, Rand decided to transfer the
bulk of its operation back to Santa Monica, which is the headquarters of
the Rand Corporation. And so I went to California, with a number of
other people, and continued the training there— although I was doing
training in other things as well as what I had started out doing (the
executive system)—just training in the general operations of the overall
SAGE system. Then—it was while I was still working there, but after the
System Development Corporation had split off from Rand to take on the
ongoing responsibility of providing maintenance people for the SAGE
system—I was actually lent back to Mitre—what had become Mitre, because
it was split off from the Lincoln Lab—to work on the first air traffic
control system prototype, which was implemented on the Whirlwind
computer, down in the Barta Building there on the MIT campus. And then I
subsequently decided to come back to Boston, and to Mitre, where I
continued to work: a little bit on that first prototype, and then was
heavily involved in the specification and oversight of the
implementation and the testing of the second prototype of today’s air
traffic control system—which was implemented on one of the SAGE
computers.

**Janet Abbate:**

That was implemented on the—IBM was making those computers? I forget
exactly what they called that.

**Marlene Hazle:**

The IBM ANFSQ-7\. Just one of those catchy names\! \laughs.\

**Janet Abbate:**

So did you come back specifically because you wanted to work on that air
traffic problem?

**Marlene Hazle:**

I came back because I wanted to come back to Boston, and I also very
much liked working on the air traffic control. Again, it was something
new and different. And working on a significant prototype system was
very exciting, and gave one a wonderful opportunity to understand how
to—understand the application for which you were writing software. I
actually went to air traffic controller school in Oklahoma City to learn
what air traffic controllers did\! —and used that information in helping
to write the specifications for our prototype system. And then when the
prototype was completed, and we were ready to test the system, the FAA
sent, I think it was thirteen working air traffic controllers to
participate in our test and evaluation of this system for a year. They
came and lived in Boston and participated in the test and evaluation of
that system for a full year.

So we had a marvelous opportunity to really understand what the
application was, and how real air traffic controllers could or could not
use what we had built for them. Of course we did lots of revision based
on their experience trying to use the software that had been developed
for them. Well, that’s the purpose of a prototype, of course, to put
something before somebody and try to use it to do whatever the job is,
and then understand where its shortcomings are, and how it can be
improved to better support the individuals.

**Janet Abbate:**

So your job was quite broad, in the sense that you needed to thoroughly
understand the application, figure out what needed to be done, and how
you could translate that into . . .

**Marlene Hazle:**

Into some software, some displays. Right.

**Janet Abbate:**

Right. And then, in addition, doing the actual coding or implementation
or figuring out what hardware was needed—I mean, were you personally
involved in every stage of that?

**Marlene Hazle:**

I was not personally involved in the implementation. Actually, the
implementation for this second big prototype air traffic control system
was done by the System Development Corporation, and Mitre was
responsible for the specification. SDC was basically a subcontractor, a
contractor providing the software. Then we would run the system; we
would test it to make sure that it was doing what we thought it should
be doing—that it had met the specifications—and then the air traffic
controllers would try to use the system. And we actually—we actually had
airplanes flying around in the sky who were part of our test, so that we
knew where the airplanes were, and we were tracking the airplanes using
the radar inputs that were coming into the system, and then the
controllers were trying to keep track of the planes and to perform their
control function.

Yes, so it was broad. It was very broad, from the understanding of the
requirements in the first place, then writing what they’re trying to
envision—you know, how those requirements could be met through displays
and interactions—and then writing those specifications, and then testing
the software, as I said before—testing the software to make sure that it
did what you specified, and then testing it at another level, to make
sure that in fact helped the controllers do their job.

**Janet Abbate:**

That must have been exciting. When was the first time you took an
airplane that was using your system?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Oh\! Well\! It was quite a while later, because the prototype was
completed in—we finished the work on that prototype in 1964; and then
the Mitre people who had been involved in this prototype were required
by the FAA to go to Washington, to be close to the FAA headquarters, to
specify and oversee the acquisition of the real air traffic control
system. And so I did not participate in that, because I chose to stay
here in the Boston area, and it took some time for those specifications
and the implementation and the testing to get done—of course, there were
new computers to be built. So I can’t honestly remember when that air
traffic control system first became operational. It was a number of
years later.

**Janet Abbate:**

What were they doing until then?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Oh\! Well, they were talking on the radio, and . . .

**Janet Abbate:**

And using radar?

**Marlene Hazle:**

They did have radar screens, but they were just—blips being displayed.
There was no automated ability to follow a series of blips and say,
“Ah\! that’s an airplane\!” And, “That’s American Flight 369 that’s
going from Boston to New York\!” And, “He’s where he’s supposed to be”
or “He’s not where he’s supposed to be\!” And it’s that kind of support
that the software of the air traffic control system gave the controller
that he didn’t have before—you know, as well as many other things. So
they were on the radio and they were just looking at these sort of
basic, raw radar returns; and they were counting on people to fly from
one navigational aid to the next and in the air lanes that they were
supposed to be in.

**Janet Abbate:**

What was your next big project after that?

### Working With the Air Force

**Marlene Hazle:**

After that, I was involved in the development of yet another prototype
system; actually I spent many years involved in the development of
prototypes at Mitre. And this was a prototype system developed to
demonstrate—really, it was more of a demonstration system, I would have
to say—how computers could be used to support command—commanders, Air
Force commanders who were trying to understand a war situation, in
particular a tactical situation. So, we were using a very sophisticated,
new computer at Mitre called the Stretch, and we were trying to put
together a system fairly quickly, because as I said it was really a
demonstration system, and so in the process of doing that we were
encouraged to use what was then a new kind of programming language, a
list-processing language.

**Janet Abbate:**

Was this LISP?

**Marlene Hazle:**

It was a derivative of LISP. It was called TREET, and I don’t even
remember what TREET stands for\! But anyway, we did—and it was developed
at Mitre; this language and system was developed at Mitre—so we did
develop a demonstration system, and many high-ranking officers in the
Air Force were brought in to participate in—I think it was a two-day
exposure to the kinds of things that computers could do for them, if
they had good displays of situations and good displays of what their
resources might be for dealing with the situation. And out of that we
developed yet another prototype system, which was specifically oriented
to tactical air mission planning for the Air Force. Now, this was the
time when the Vietnam War was going on, and there was of course a great
deal of interest in providing some computer support to the mission
planning function. And we developed something that was called the
Tactical Data System Testbed. It was actually a very early
implementation of a distributed processing system, where we had a
central computer, which was a rather small IBM Process Control Computer,
to which was attached a PDP-8; and attached to the PDP-8—there were
eventually two PDP-8s—were workstations—what were called “intelligent
workstations.” At each one of these workstations there was a display;
there was a tape recorder, a printer, and another little gadget, which
enabled people who couldn’t type on the keyboard to sort of pull
computer messages—messages that they wanted to send to the system, to
request display, or to print, or to do some of the other things that
they were able to do—This little gadget allowed them to take pretyped
messages from a little tape cartridge and put them up on the screen, so
all they had to do was type in the variable values\! \laughs.\

**Janet Abbate:**

Sort of a menu.

**Marlene Hazle:**

Right.

And we developed—in the process of developing this system, we developed
a very simple high-level language that allowed us to—oh, generate
displays very easily, so that we could get the kind of quick reaction
time that you want when you’re doing prototype development. You want to
be able to take a look at something and say, “Oh\! Well, I wish I’d done
that some other way\!” and then make the change as rapidly as possible.

So, we again brought in people—a limited number of Air Force people—to
help us make an assessment of the usefulness of this tactical
air—tactical data system—to support the mission planning function. And
then some of us who were involved in that prototype development
ultimately went on to participate in the specification of a real Air
Force system that would support tactical data planning. So it was
transferring the knowledge gained from the prototype into the next
generation of system that would in fact be procured by the Air Force and
put into use, eventually.

**Janet Abbate:**

And so that was actually used at some point?

### Developing Large Systems

**Marlene Hazle:**

Oh yes, it was. Of course, these things took a long time\! I think—I’m
just sort of guessing now, as I look back—the sort of normal cycle was:
You started writing serious specifications for a system—now, this was
after you’d done some prototyping and done other investigations of what
the requirements really were—from the time you started writing those
specifications until the time that you might have sort of the first
version of that system that you were specifying: a minimum of five
years. And often substantially longer than that. And then all those
systems went through various phases: you would start out with a very
limited subset of the total capability that you had specified, and get
that up and running—in the field, ideally; and then add a little more
functionality on. And those systems lived for ten, fifteen, twenty
years.

**Janet Abbate:**

What was the biggest challenge, from your perspective, in creating these
kinds of systems?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Well, to me the biggest, the most interesting part was in fact the
understanding of the application, and the envisioning of how that job
might be supported with the—now, we’re talking, all along here,
interactive systems: displays, and messages, light guns, light pens—the
precursors of mice\! \laughs.\ So to me, the challenge was to
understand the job, and then to envision what kind of software might be
useful; and then to have the opportunity to see and evaluate it in a
prototype situation. Unfortunately, as time went on, there was less and
less money to support these significant prototype developments, so you
had less and less opportunity to envision a solution, have it
implemented, and then get the feedback of actual user—prototypical use.
There were many demands for different systems, and limited
resources—both financial and personnel—and so the prototyping tended
to be minimized in system developments.

**Janet Abbate:**

Do you think that’s a change in general, over time? Not just at Mitre?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Yes. I think over time the people working in the computer field—at least
some people—got better at making that leap from the application to
useful specifications and useful software. But I think all of us who had
the opportunity to participate in those early prototyping efforts
lamented the lack of emphasis on that over time, and felt that systems
were being specified without—and procured, and put in the field—without
adequate understanding—without adequate testing of the efficacy of what
had been specified and implemented.

Now, one of the things that I was involved with, which was sort of a way
of addressing some of these problems, was the development of guidelines
for the user-system interface of these display-based systems, so that
for each new system being specified and implemented people weren’t
starting over with a blank page and saying, “Well, I wonder what the
display should look like,” or how the information should be arranged, or
how the interactions between the system and the users of the system
should take place. So guidelines—we actually undertook the development
of a substantial set of guidelines for people to follow when they’re
designing displays for computer systems. And of course, people were
starting to write books about how to do systems engineering, which is
what this big process was generally called. So, some of the knowledge
was being captured in books and papers and things like that.

But, as I say, I think most of us who had ever participated in those
prototypes felt that it was unfortunate that—in our case, the Air Force,
which was a major customer here in Boston—needed to go out and specify
systems without having had the benefits of the prototyping.

**Janet Abbate:**

And the input from the users.

**Marlene Hazle:**

And the input from the users.

**Janet Abbate:**

Who just got stuck with whatever got built.

So that would be, about, in the ‘60s that you were starting to try and
codify a bit the user interface?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Oh, no, not as early as the ‘60s\! I don’t think so. I mean, people were
sort of writing down things, but I think the writing down of the
guidelines for the user-system interface was, oh, somewhere I would say
in the late ‘70s, early ‘80s. That’s sort of my best recollection of it.
It took a long time. . . .The people in the computing field . . . didn’t
do a lot of writing\! \laughs.\

**Janet Abbate:**

I guess you’d have to build a few systems before it occurred to you that
that was an issue.

**Marlene Hazle:**

Yes.

The person who did the major work in this—the development of user-system
interface guidelines—was not only an engineer, but actually had a
doctorate in clinical (I think it was clinical) psychology. He wanted a
great deal of certainty before setting out to write down guidelines for
other people to follow—a lot of corroboration—so I think there was a
hesitance on his part, for sure, and on the part of other people, to
write down rules unless they really had a lot of data and consensus to
support the rules that were getting written down. So I think the natural
cautiousness of people with a scientific background—to have the data to
support what they said.

**Janet Abbate:**

Well, it’s a tough area.

**Marlene Hazle:**

Because I remember many people would say, “Well, give us some
guidelines.” And it was difficult to get them written down, for a while.

**Janet Abbate:**

Did you ever find yourself wishing you had some new piece of hardware or
something to put in the system? Like, “Gee, I wish we had a light pen,”
or something?

**Marlene Hazle:**

I don’t remember . . . I don’t actually remember, myself, looking for
hardware to solve the problems, so I can’t say I’ve actually had that
experience. I was much more interested in finding the software to
support our own work, actually . . .

### Developing Internal-Use Software

**Janet Abbate:**

You were developing software tools for your own internal use?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Right. After having worked for a number of years on a couple of these
large systems that I’ve talked about—the air traffic control, and the
tactical planning, and then some support for the military airlifting
plan—Military Airlift Command Planning—I, and Mitre, became of aware of
the emergence of some tools that might be useful to us in doing our own
work, and might be useful to the contractors who were implementing the
systems that, basically, we had specified. And so we started looking
into things like program design languages and specification languages;
and we set about doing some evaluations of some of the things like
program design languages and specification languages—and the supporting
software that went with them, that had become available—and decided
that, well, nobody else had quite the same job that we did, and
therefore, in particular the specification languages and capability that
was available—the most well-known one, and probably the furthest
developed one—was really not adequate to support the kind of
specification writing we did.

And so we undertook to develop some tools in-house to support the work
of Mitre and the Air Force, and this was a research and development
effort. And we did develop a system that helped us put together the
written specifications for systems, utilizing—actually utilizing text
that had been generalized from previous systems; text that would
describe things like parts of the user-system interface. And you would
then tailor these blocks of text to meet the specific requirements of
whatever specifications you were writing, but it was sort of that head
start, so you’re not starting with a blank page again— because there’s a
great deal of similarity, particularly in the military systems that we
were involved with, going back to the SAGE air defense system.

There were a number of different versions of that system that were
developed subsequent to the original SAGE system. And some work on
systems that had a lot of similar functionality, although not
necessarily air defense systems. For example, many systems were involved
in tracking airplanes. So the idea was to use this information—the
knowledge, the experience that had been developed in earlier systems—and
make it available to the people who were specifying the follow-on
systems.

So that was one kind of support we provided.

**Janet Abbate:**

Was there a name for the specification language?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Well, we didn’t develop, actually, a specification language, it was
just—that part of the system, which we just called the “specification
development system,” was simply a mechanism for storing and indexing
these components, or reusable elements of specifications. Now, I’m
talking a time prior to word-processing systems. This is before the PC\!
\laughs.\ We also developed the capability . . . Well, actually, not
quite prior to word processing, because Mitre was involved in word
processing on mainframe computers very early on in the game. We
developed a series of tools that allowed one to—would you believe—spell
check? And index, and perform lots of sort of simple functions that any
word processing system would do today, but at that time there was no
automated support for that.

And then, as another piece of software that we developed to support the
work of Mitre, we developed a system—you know, another component of this
specification system—that helped us to manage the comments and
modifications that were made to specifications, because when you’re
writing specifications for a big, complex system, you go through a
number of drafts of these specifications. You send out the draft and the
users comment on it, and the hardware people comment, and anyone who has
a stake or a part of the system has the opportunity to comment on the
specifications. So you get these reams of comments back, which need to
be reviewed, evaluated, and disposed of: either incorporated into the
specifications or not incorporated into the specifications, and if you
don’t incorporate them, you have to be able to answer why you didn’t
incorporate them. So we developed some software to help us manage that
important function.

And that’s about the same time that we developed these user guidelines,
as a matter of fact. So that was a period of having the opportunity to
be our own users, and to go through the iterations based on our own
experience with the use of the system, because we actually went out to
help the other people within the MitreESD \Electronic Systems
Division\ community use this software that we had prepared to help
them. Because it was actually a fairly complicated system, which just
took some getting used to, in how to use it, and it involved lots of
people .

**Janet Abbate:**

Would that actually generate—could you translate specs into code?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Oh no. The product here was a written-type specification, which would
then be used as the basis for procurement. Contractors would read those
specifications and propose hardware and software that would meet those
specifications, and then there would be a source selection, and the Air
Force would pick one of the bidding contractors, and then they would go
forward and—still, again, using the specifications—actually implement a
system that they had proposed to meet those \specifications\.

### MITRE Systems

**Janet Abbate:**

How was the SAGE system, and the systems at Mitre that were kind of
inherited from that: How was that different from what other people were
doing in computing, as far as you could tell?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Well, of course, as I . . . That’s where I started out, so I just
assumed that it was standard. But over time I began to realize, when I
started going out of my own situation and meeting other people in the
computing world— (There weren’t a lot of conferences then. At the very
beginning there weren’t any that were specifically dedicated to
computing; for a while they were mostly engineering things, I think,
where the computing people got together.) —It took me a long time to
realize how unique the SAGE system was, in that it was so big and so
complicated; that it was a real-time system—we were actually trying to
process radar as it was coming in, and respond to the actions of
operators in real time, so that when they punched a button, something
happened; it was a very early, sophisticated display system; early
interactive mechanism; and in lieu of the sort of typewriter keyboard
that is standard today, there were banks of buttons to be pushed, which
of course had to be programmed for their functionality; and, in lieu of
the mouse as a pointing device, there was what we called a “light gun,”
which actually looked like a gun, and was pointed at the display. So it
took me quite some time, actually, to realize that most people were
doing FORTRAN(FORTRAN "FORTRAN") on mainframe computers, and using
punch cards and tapes, and that they were not engaged in this sort
of—the real-time interactive computing systems that we were.

**Janet Abbate:**

Did you get to program them interactively, as opposed to batch
processing?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Well, I never had programming as my chief job. I was just always either
in training early on, and then in the requirements specification, and
that sort of thing. Well, I did do some programming, but it was always a
small part of one of these prototype efforts. And that was interactive,
yes. Yes.

**Janet Abbate:**

So that was unusual.

**Marlene Hazle:**

Yes.

**Janet Abbate:**

Was that a fun place to work?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Yes\! It was fun because we were always doing something new. At least,
for many years we were always doing something new. And I think by and
large, the people who were working on these systems were people who
wanted to do a fine engineering job, and who wanted to do something
useful for the customer—whoever the customer was, whether it was the
FAA, or whether it was some Air Force officer who was trying to do
planning, or trying to do air defense in the case of the SAGE system—so
there was there was lots of personal interaction with the customer,
particularly in the early days, when we were involved in so many of the
prototypical developments. I always said I’ve never done the same thing
twice, which was certainly true in the beginning and almost true to the
end\! So that kind of job is always challenging.

I’m a little stumped to think of anything \else\ . . . I’m inclined to
say: You know, part of the fun was that the people are so bright—you
know, who were doing this—and they are, I think. Mitre’s always
described as sort of quasi-academic, and what you get is a lot of the
real bright people who aren’t trying to make a fortune, but trying to do
something useful, something good for society, or the country.

**Janet Abbate:**

Sounds great\!

**Marlene Hazle:**

And, so it . . . Although . . . There certainly were pressures. There
was lots of pressure, because people were so notoriously bad at judging
how long it was going to take to do anything. You know, over and over
you would—people would make commitments to do something by a certain
time, but in fact they were unrealistic commitments, but—as is the case
with human beings, I guess—whether it’s unrealistic or not, you don’t
want to fail to do what you committed to. So there were those kinds of
pressures.

### Women in Computing

**Janet Abbate:**

Would you be working all night?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Sometimes. Not too often, but . . .

**Janet Abbate:**

How did you balance work and family?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Well, I’m not married, and I’ve never been married, so I didn’t have to
make that balance. My life was mine to choose to do with. Well, I
certainly had an outside life: I was not working like one of the dot-com
kids. No way\! But every so often we would get into a situation where
we’d end up working all night, or most of the night, usually for two
or three days, something like that—but not on an ongoing basis.

**Janet Abbate:**

Were there a lot of other women in your group?

**Marlene Hazle:**

At the very beginning, my programming class—my SAGE programming class—I
would say it was about a quarter women. And I would say that, say, over
the first . . . . Well, the time I was at Rand and SDC, there continued
to be a high number of women. You know, these are people of course who
are coming from all sorts of different backgrounds, to be trained in
programming and to go off and find a new career. I mean, there were
teachers, there were . . . Among the women, I would say . . . Well, I’m
not sure . . . Several people I remember were teachers, and the rest I
can’t . . . Well, and a number of them were just college graduates like
me . . .

But then, at Mitre, there were few women. There were very few women in
the beginning.

I would say that probably 70 to 75 percent of the people at Mitre are
engineers—have engineering degrees. That’s probably still true, and that
certainly was, I’m sure, true–even truer—then. And so, there are so few
women in the engineering field that you would sort of expect few women—
And actually, the other women that were at Mitre early (like Judy
\Clapp\ and me), none of them were engineers; none of us were
engineers. We had all, you know, come from various academic backgrounds.
Over time, of course, some women engineers did come, and then there
began to be computer science graduates, after a number of years.

I never personally felt—I never really sensed discrimination or bias, in
terms of not being able to do something I wanted to do, or being, you
know, in any sort of personal relationship with somebody, a situation
where I felt that there was bias. But underlying, there was a bias
against promotion.

**Janet Abbate:**

Were salaries comparable, as far as you could tell?

**Marlene Hazle:**

As far as I know, they were. Among the members of the technical staff, I
don’t think there was significant bias, but there was a bias against
promotion for a long time.

I don’t know how unique Mitre would be in this respect. But—and this
probably was somewhat unique—at Mitre there was no—for many years there
was no management development program. There was no mentoring; there was
just—It was: “You can do it on your own.” And in order to—in order to
get someplace, like to be a project leader or to be promoted, you really
had to go after it. Well now, that’s true to a certain extent. It wasn’t
entirely true. But there was no— As I say, there was no development
program, for anybody. And I always felt that it was a mistake for Mitre,
as a company, to not have that sort of thing. I always felt that there
was a lot of wasted potential there, because it was a do-it-on-your-own
. . . .

**Janet Abbate:**

Were they subject to affirmative action policies, since they did so much
government contracting?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Yes.

**Janet Abbate:**

And did that change things?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Yes, it did: somewhat. It made them . . .

**Janet Abbate:**

In the seventies, maybe?

**Marlene Hazle:**

I can’t tell you . . . but it probably was the seventies. I’m very poor
at remembering when things happened.

It made them much more conscious about hiring, interviewing, and
actually sort of aggressively looking for female candidates—because it
was really female oriented at that point, rather than minority—and that
was the first push. And it made them take a look at salary
discrimination, and I’m sure they did some adjustment of salaries, when
affirmative action was a very strong influence for any government
contractor.

I think that was sort of the beginning of opening their eyes to the
reality of the male domination\!

**Janet Abbate:**

Do you think that’s partly because they did so much military work—the
male focus?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Well, I think that it probably affected the extent to which potential
candidates were interested in Mitre. In terms of whether it would affect
the people at Mitre—whether that would affect them—I wouldn’t think so,
actually. I think it was just sort of “this is the way it’s always
been.”

**Janet Abbate:**

Engineering culture.

**Marlene Hazle:**

Yes.

**Janet Abbate:**

Do you think computing jobs have become more open to, or welcoming to,
women?

**Marlene Hazle:**

I’m not sure I can answer that question, just because I don’t think I
have a broad enough experience. I spent my career really in one place,
and so I didn’t see—directly, through direct experience—different
situations; although I did get to know people at a number of large
corporations, people who worked for contractors on some of our systems.
And I’ve felt that as time went by, there actually was a decrease in the
number of women that I would see at conferences.

And I never was too sure why that was. I had a theory that in the
beginning, nobody—everybody was a beginner. There was no hierarchy; the
new companies didn’t have any ingrained hierarchy. But as time went by,
those hierarchies began to develop, and it was the men who were at the
top. And also, as more established companies began to make computing a
part of their work, again, they already had an established, male
hierarchy. And I always felt that that probably had something to do with
the apparent decrease in the percentage of women that I encountered.

And then I must say in the last—say, the last ten years that I worked, I
began to see a lot more women again. These now, of course, were the
younger women coming into the work force with degrees in computer
science, almost all of them, or engineering—a few in engineering—and in
general, quite—at least the ones that I had much contact with—quite
strong personalities, and strong technically. So that was pleasing to
me, to see some young women coming in.

**Janet Abbate:**

You finished at Mitre in ‘83?

**Marlene Hazle:**

‘93\.

**Janet Abbate:**

‘93, sorry. So that would be the ‘80s and early ‘90s that you’re talking
about.

Do you have any advice for young women contemplating going into
computing?

**Marlene Hazle:**

\pause.\ Well, I guess it would probably be my advice to any young
person getting into any new career, and that would be: to make sure that
you’re interested in what you’re doing, and that you understand where
what you’re doing fits in with the bigger picture of computing, and
understand what a progression—a professional progression, from wherever
you are at that point—what the progression is. Be looking to see where
you’re going. And I would strongly recommend—and have recommended to my
nieces, one of whom is an aeronautical engineer, but has had a lot of
involvement with computing, and the other one who is working in the
computing business for an accounting firm—to find a female mentor:
because there’s still few enough females in the field that you could
benefit from having the advice and support of somebody who’s a little
ahead of you.

One of the things I say in retrospect on this subject is that strangely
enough, the few women at Mitre never sort of banded together in any real
way to form any kind of support group or mentoring function. And I’m
sorry that that didn’t happen for those of us who were very early, just
in terms of being with each other and talking to each other; and I’m
sorry that we didn’t try to help the people who came after us, in a sort
of deliberate way. I think we would have benefited, and I think the
younger people would have benefited. I mean, I did have some
relationships with younger women, but it was a very—just because we
happened to like each other, and be working together—it wasn’t any
premeditated sort of relationship.

### The Benefits of Sharing Code

**Marlene Hazle:**

And I would throw in this comment that I may want to erase, and that is
that, in the beginning, strangely enough there was a lot of competition
among people in the computing field at Mitre—and I had a certain amount
of sense of this outside of Mitre, too—that everybody wanted to sort of
be right —be, you know, be the best, and so there was competition and a
non-supportive attitude for a very long time. Among groups of people,
more than on an individual basis, but among groups.

**Janet Abbate:**

That’s sort of reminiscent of what I hear about how male computer hacker
culture was very competitive. Do you have a sense that it was sort of an
engineeringcomputing kind of culture? Or some other reason?

**Marlene Hazle:**

It was male. It was, you know, I would say . . . It was a sort of a male
thing, and there was lots of sniping, and . . . . Where everybody was so
new—I mean, ideally you would want to share anything that you learned
with other people; but that’s not what happened.

**Janet Abbate:**

Judy \Clapp\ had mentioned something about people being very
possessive about their code—and I guess you weren’t maybe coding as
much, but . . .

**Marlene Hazle:**

Right: She was much more involved in that than I was.

**Janet Abbate:**

Someone had written this book called Egoless Programming —

**Marlene Hazle:**

Right.

**Janet Abbate:**

—to kind of counteract that prevailing thing; which surprised me, that
it seems like there was kind of this more territorial feeling at the
time.

**Marlene Hazle:**

Well, right; and your saying that about Judy \reminds me . . .\ Right.
I think that people were very possessive about the code they had
written, because it was sort of a laying-out of their mind and their
intelligence on paper that other people could see. And they didn’t
necessarily want anybody else looking at it\! And God forbid that
somebody else should come in and change it, or tell them how to change
it\!

And that’s an interesting thing too, because—I told you that the very
first thing that I did, and that the other people who came to be trained
by Rand did, was to read the code that had already been written. Now, I
will tell you that was the best education for how to program—was to read
somebody else’s code—good code, ideally—and to see how it’s done. And so
many people were really denied that opportunity because of this “it’s my
code” kind of stuff. I mean, I always felt that it should be a part of
anyone’s education and training to sit down and read good code.

**Janet Abbate:**

That’s so interesting, because I interviewed a woman, Elsie Shutt, who
ran her own programming business . . .

**Marlene Hazle:**

Right . . .

**Janet Abbate:**

It’s called Computations, Inc., and it was women with children working
part-time from home. But anyway, what she said was that it was their
standard practice that they would swap code and read each other’s
code—mainly for error-checking, you know, before using expensive
computer time—but that it was really beneficial, because they all
learned tricks and stuff from each other, from reading each other’s code
all the time. And I remember that she really emphasized that, and it
sounds like that really could have been a useful thing.

**Marlene Hazle:**

Absolutely\!

**Janet Abbate:**

Did that change at some point at Mitre, that atmosphere?

**Marlene Hazle:**

The antagonism? I would say that it subsided as the field matured. At
another level of our work there was a corporate effort that was
initiated maybe ten years before I retired. Somebody up high realized
that people had not been talking about their system engineering and
management mistakes. The mistakes were being made over, and over, and
over again\! And somebody said, “Well, you know, the reason that we’re
making the mistakes over and over again is that nobody wants to talk
about the mistakes. So they always document the wonderful things we did
here, but they don’t document the failures, and an analysis of, ‘Well,
why did something fail? What could we have done differently? And how did
we deal with the failure?’”

So there was a big push to document lessons learned, and to share
information—both lessons learned in a positive sense and lessons learned
in a negative sense. And that—I think Judy is still involved in
something, a sort of a corporate capturing of the lessons
learned—because people just realized that you save yourself a lot of
trouble, time and money, if you share information about, particularly,
the problems, and how they were caused, and how they were solved. So I
think that there has been a recognition of the value of that. And
there’s also—I mean, there have been some organizational changes at
Mitre that were just being initiated at the time I retired, I think—to
support sharing of expertise, and people, resources, more than in the
past. But it was a long time in coming.

But I remember very vividly the antagonism, the sniping, that just
seemed so unnecessary.

### The Joys of Computing

**Janet Abbate:**

Well, to look at the other side: what have you found to be the most
satisfying aspects of your work with computers?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Well, I would say: the support for human activity that makes things
easier and more efficient. Deep down somewhere inside me I have a sort
of drive for efficiency and straightforwardness, so I think that’s
always been the pleasing—the thing that pleased me about the work that I
was involved in.

**Janet Abbate:**

It was kind of aesthetically satisfying?

**Marlene Hazle:**

Yes\! Yes. There are a lot of people in the computer field who are
very—particularly the computer scientists—they like the elegant
solution, they’re into elegance. I’m into functionality and
simplicity—well, elegance can often be simplicity too, but . . .

I guess I’m much more—I’ve always said—I think (and I’ve read this,
too): I look at a computer as a tool. It’s—I’m not a game player; I’ve
never played games on computers, and I don’t look at the computer as
sort of a fancy toy. To me, it’s a tool. And I think a lot of women look
at computers that way, as opposed to—a lot more men, I think are
interested in the “toyness” of it: something to play with; that
wonderfully complex, infinitely malleable thing that computing is—as
opposed to looking at it as a way to do something.

I know somebody wrote some books about that a few years ago. There was a
woman—I would say maybe ten years ago, fifteen years ago—there was a
woman in academics who was trying to explain the difference between
women in computer science and men in computer science.

**Janet Abbate:**

I don’t know if I know that . . .

**Marlene Hazle:**

I can’t tell you anything more about it . . . I think, actually, there
was an article in the New York Times, and I remember—I can see the
picture of the woman, but not clearly enough to know who she was.

**Janet Abbate:**

I’ve got a sort of title that won’t come to the front of my mind that
might be that book, but I’m not remembering it. And I think that—I’ve
certainly heard other people say similar things.

And in your case, you were actually able to build systems that
eventually got used by real people with real needs. The “toolness” was
built in.

**Marlene Hazle:**

\laughs.\ It was pleasing when we were making tools for ourselves,
too, because then we got to use them\!

Retrieved from
"<http:ethw.orgindex.php?title=Oral-History:Marlene_Hazle&oldid=108611>"

Categories(Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* Automation(Category:Automation "Category:Automation")
* Design
  automation(Category:Design_automation "Category:Design automation")
* User
  interfaces(Category:User_interfaces "Category:User interfaces")
* Communications(Category:Communications "Category:Communications")
* High-speed
  electronics(Category:High-speed_electronics "Category:High-speed electronics")
* Computing and
  electronics(Category:Computing_and_electronics "Category:Computing and electronics")
* Computer
  networks(Category:Computer_networks "Category:Computer networks")
* Computer
  science(Category:Computer_science "Category:Computer science")
* Computing(Category:Computing "Category:Computing")
* Data systems(Category:Data_systems "Category:Data systems")
* Data
  engineering(Category:Data_engineering "Category:Data engineering")
* Distributed
  computing(Category:Distributed_computing "Category:Distributed computing")
* Distributed information
  systems(Category:Distributed_information_systems "Category:Distributed information systems")
* Profession(Category:Profession "Category:Profession")
* People and
  organizations(Category:People_and_organizations "Category:People and organizations")
* Engineers(Category:Engineers "Category:Engineers")
* Government(Category:Government "Category:Government")
* Non-profit(Category:Non-profit "Category:Non-profit")
* Research and development
  labs(Category:Research_and_development_labs "Category:Research and development labs")
* Universities(Category:Universities "Category:Universities")
* Engineering
  fundamentals(Category:Engineering_fundamentals "Category:Engineering fundamentals")
* Design
  methodology(Category:Design_methodology "Category:Design methodology")
* Systems engineering and
  theory(Category:Systems_engineering_and_theory "Category:Systems engineering and theory")
* Standardization(Category:Standardization "Category:Standardization")
* Code standards(Category:Code_standards "Category:Code standards")
* Military
  standards(Category:Military_standards "Category:Military standards")
* Software
  standards(Category:Software_standards "Category:Software standards")
* Transportation(Category:Transportation "Category:Transportation")
* Aerospace
  engineering(Category:Aerospace_engineering "Category:Aerospace engineering")
* Command and control
  systems(Category:Command_and_control_systems "Category:Command and control systems")
* Electronic
  warfare(Category:Electronic_warfare "Category:Electronic warfare")
* Military aerospace
  equipment(Category:Military_aerospace_equipment "Category:Military aerospace equipment")
* Aviation(Category:Aviation "Category:Aviation")

## Contents

* 1 About Marlene Hazle(#About_Marlene_Hazle)
* 2 About the Interview(#About_the_Interview)
* 3 Copyright Statement(#Copyright_Statement)
* 4 Interview(#Interview)
  * 4\.1 Family and Educational
    Background(#Family_and_Educational_Background)
  * 4\.2 Looking for Work(#Looking_for_Work)
  * 4\.3 Starting at RAND(#Starting_at_RAND)
  * 4\.4 Creating the Air Traffic Control
    System(#Creating_the_Air_Traffic_Control_System)
  * 4\.5 Working With the Air Force(#Working_With_the_Air_Force)
  * 4\.6 Developing Large Systems(#Developing_Large_Systems)
  * 4\.7 Developing Internal-Use
    Software(#Developing_Internal-Use_Software)
  * 4\.8 MITRE Systems(#MITRE_Systems)
  * 4\.9 Women in Computing(#Women_in_Computing)
  * 4\.10 The Benefits of Sharing Code(#The_Benefits_of_Sharing_Code)
  * 4\.11 The Joys of Computing(#The_Joys_of_Computing)

!Powered by
MediaWiki(resourcesassetspoweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)(www.mediawiki.org)
!Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki(extensionsSemanticMediaWikiincludes..resourcesimagessmw_button.png)(https:www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 21 November 2014, at 10:47\.

* This page has been accessed 3,384 times.

* About ETHW(ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* Policies and disclaimers(ETHW:Policies "ETHW:Policies")

