Toggle navigation   

ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki(Main_Page)

* ** Go ****()
  * Browse by Subject(ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * Encyclopedia(Encyclopedia)
  
  * Oral Histories(Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * First Hand Histories(First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * LandmarksMilestones(/Landmarks)
  
  * Archives(Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * Education(ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * Random page(Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * Help(Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * Contact us(Special:Contact)
  
  * 
  * Recent changes(Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * New pages(Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* ** Actions ****()
  * View
    source(index.php?title=Oral-History:Jean_Dollimore&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source e")
  
  * History(index.php?title=Oral-History:Jean_Dollimore&action=history "Past revisions of this page [h]")
  
  * 
  * Oral-History(Oral-History:Jean_Dollimore)
  
  * Discussion(index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Jean_Dollimore&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page [t]")
  
  * 
* ** Tools ****()
  * What links
    here(Special:WhatLinksHere/Oral-History:Jean_Dollimore "A list of all wiki pages that link here j]")
  
  * Related
    changes(Special:RecentChangesLinked/Oral-History:Jean_Dollimore "Recent changes in pages linked from this page k]")
  
  * Special
    pages(Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages q]")
  
  * Printable
    version(index.php?title=Oral-History:Jean_Dollimore&printable=yes "Printable version of this page p]")
  
  * Permanent
    link(index.php?title=Oral-History:Jean_Dollimore&oldid=108535 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * Page
    information(index.php?title=Oral-History:Jean_Dollimore&action=info)
  
  * Browse properties(Special:Browse/Oral-2DHistory:Jean_Dollimore)
* ** Account ****(# "Account")
  * Log
    in(index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3AJean+Dollimore)
  
  * 
  * Request account(Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Jean Dollimore

## About Jean Dollimore

Jean Dollimore, an English computer programmer, began her career working
for the University College in London. Prior to that, she attended
Bedford College, which was then part of London University, and received
her degree in mathematics. She also received a postgraduate certificate
in education which she used to teach mathematics in a secondary school
for a few years after graduating. Dollimore was involved in research in
computer programming after teaching, eventually making it over to
University College, where she began working in the chemistry department
as a computer programmer. From there, she moved to the Institute of
Computer Science, amending programs from home as she raised her
children. She also taught courses at the Institute on
FORTRAN(FORTRAN "FORTRAN"). Dollimore was also involved in the COSMOS
project. She ended up specializing in distributed systems, co-authoring
the influential book on the topic now in its 5th edition, *Distributed
Systems: Concepts and Design*.

In this interview, Dollimore talks about growing up, attending college,
and getting interested in math and teaching. She talks about her work on
projects in the field and shares her reflections on the field of
computing. She provides detail on each project, her experiences as a
computer programmer, and shares her thoughts on her contributions to the
field of computing.

## About the Interview

JEAN DOLLIMORE: An Interview Conducted by Janet Abbate, IEEE History
Center, 4 April 2001

Interview \# 588 for the IEEE History Center, The Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
the IEEE History Center Oral History Program, IEEE History Center at
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ
07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include identification of
the specific passages to be quoted, anticipated use of the passages, and
identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Jean Dollimore, an oral history conducted in 2001 by Janet Abbate, IEEE
History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

## Interview

INTERVIEW: Jean Dollimore\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: 4 April 2001\
PLACE: Jean Dollimore's office, Queen Mary College, London, England

### Background and Education

**Abbate:**

This is an interview with Jean Dollimore, on April 4th, 2001\.

To start, in what year were you born?

**Dollimore:**

1934\.

**Abbate:**

And where did you grow up?

**Dollimore:**

In Hertfordshire. Well, I was actually born a bit nearer to London than
that, but I was moved out to Hertfordshire when I was about four or
five. That’s about 25 miles North of London. I went to school in a town
called St. Albans.

**Abbate:**

I’ve heard of that.

**Dollimore:**

Have you?

**Abbate:**

Yes. What did your parents do for a living?

**Dollimore:**

My father was a solicitor, and my mother had a very short career before
she married, as a P.E. teacher.

**Abbate:**

Did you have brothers and sisters?

**Dollimore:**

Yes. I was the oldest, and there’s a younger sister who’s about four
years younger than me, and then a brother and another sister who were
born about ten years later.

**Abbate:**

After the war?

**Dollimore:**

Well, they were born in ‘44 and ‘45\. I think they thought the war
coming to an end\! \laughs\

**Abbate:**

Did you have an interest in math or science as a child?

**Dollimore:**

In maths, definitely, but not until I was a teenager, really; and
science to some extent. I think maybe—my father was always sort of
fiddling around with things; although he was a solicitor and didn’t have
that sort of background, he sort of knew the basic physics of how
various things worked, and I think that got me interested in the science
side of it. But the maths was more due to having a teacher that seemed
very interesting. She was only there for a couple of years, but she sort
of triggered the interest.

**Abbate:**

What kind of school did you go to?

**Dollimore:**

It was actually an independent school, a private school.

**Abbate:**

Was it just girls? Or mixed?

**Dollimore:**

Just girls. Well, practically all schools were single-sex schools in the
U.K. in those days.

**Abbate:**

Really? I should look up statistics on that.

**Dollimore:**

One of my sisters actually went to a co-ed school, but they were very
unusual.

**Abbate:**

When did that change?

**Dollimore:**

‘60s, maybe. Well, my children went to co-ed schools\!

**Abbate:**

I didn’t realize that \most schools weren’t co-ed\.

So you started getting interested in math . . .

**Dollimore:**

I was about 13\.

**Abbate:**

. . . in high school?

**Dollimore:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

And then you went on to college?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, I went to university and studied maths, did a degree.

**Abbate:**

You went to Birkbeck College?

**Dollimore:**

Well, that was later on. I think I didn’t mention my first degree. I
went to Bedford College, which was then part of London University. That
was, what? ‘53 to ‘56\. And then I hadn’t quite worked out what I was
going to do next, after I got this maths degree. \laughs.\ So I went
and did a postgraduate certificate in education, which took a year. Then
I went and taught mathematics in a secondary school for two years. But
somewhere around about that time I started hearing about computers. For
some reason I didn’t know about them when I was an undergraduate. I
can’t think why not\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Did they have any at . . . ?

**Dollimore:**

I think IBM had a little center in London. I don’t know when it opened.
But this is where Birkbeck College came in. There was a chap there
called A. D. Booth, who’d made his own computer, and they ran some
evening classes. I got a diploma in numerical analysis, although it was
actually programming\! \laughing\ They had some people from the
physics department who did the numerical analysis part of it, and he
taught the hardware, and his wife taught the programming.

**Abbate:**

Interesting\! So, K. Booth was his wife?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, Kathleen.

To start with, I was doing that as an evening class, the second year I
was teaching. Then, towards the end of that year, they said they’d got
some funding for a master’s degree, so I went there and spent about a
year and a half doing some research, which involved quite a bit of
programming.

**Abbate:**

Where were you teaching?

**Dollimore:**

In Northwood—that’s in Middlesex, just a train-ride out of London.

**Abbate:**

So how did you find out about this evening course at Birkbeck?

**Dollimore:**

I think I was keeping my ear to the ground, because I think I thought
teaching wasn’t—although I ended up teaching in universities—but I
thought school teaching wasn’t quite for me.

**Abbate:**

Teaching math in secondary school wasn’t all that exciting?

**Dollimore:**

That’s right\! \laughs.\ That was a girls’ school, too; and in fact,
the attitude there was pretty terrible. Most of the girls just said, you
know, “I want to get married; what’s the point of learning all this
maths?”

**Abbate:**

But it wasn’t like that at the school you had gone to?

**Dollimore:**

I should think it probably was, but you didn’t see it like that.

**Abbate:**

You had that one teacher who . . .

**Dollimore:**

Yes, that’s right. I think most of my classmates at the school I went to
thought I was pretty mad liking maths\! \laughs.\ I mean, there were
only two of us that did maths in the sixth form\! You know, so I . . .

**Abbate:**

So when you—When you took that evening course in programming, were there
a lot of other women in it?

**Dollimore:**

I knew you were going to ask me that, and I’m having . . . I was trying
to remember about that in advance. There were other women. You know, it
was a group of about a dozen, and I suspect that maybe there were about
two other women, but it’s hard to remember.

**Abbate:**

That’s not bad. 25 percent?

**Dollimore:**

So anyway, when they offered me that grant to do a master’s degree, it
wasn’t actually a taught degree; it was just doing some research, and
sort of sitting in the lab with the Ph.D. students.

**Abbate:**

So your master’s was actually in—did they call it computer science?

**Dollimore:**

It was still called mathematics. My thesis actually says “M.Sc. in
Mathematics.” But it was a sort of problem of applied mathematics, using
programming to—numerical analysis to solve it, basically.

### Introduction to Computer Programming

**Abbate:**

What was it like using that home-made computer? How did you program it?

**Dollimore:**

Well, it was really, really weird\! You had a thing called, I think, a
“uni-punch,” and it was paper tape, and the tape had five holes across
it. There wasn’t even a typewriter to it; you had to actually press this
little punch in and . . . That was the first computer; by the time I did
the masters, London University had a computer, a Ferranti Mercury, which
was in this place that we were talking about: the Institute of Computer
Science. But I think it wasn’t actually quite the Institute at that
stage. It’s hard to remember when that opened.

**Abbate:**

Where was that, physically?

**Dollimore:**

In Gordon Square. You know the big Tower, Senate House? Do you know
where University College is?

**Abbate:**

Yes.

**Dollimore:**

It’s not far from there. It was just in a little house in a square; you
know, a Bloomsbury-type Square. And that’s not far from Birkbeck; and we
used to walk across there and use that computer. And that computer,
although it was still using this punch-paper tape, you did have things
like typewriters with keyboards that you typed the programs in.

**Abbate:**

What were you programming in? What sort of language?

**Dollimore:**

By the time of . . . The second one I’m describing is what you’d call an
assembler language. It means you’re not actually using binary, but it’s
. . .

**Abbate:**

Right, right.

**Dollimore:**

I suppose you know about these terms.

**Abbate:**

Yes.

**Dollimore:**

I suppose, when I was at Birkbeck using this very primitive computer, we
were actually programming in binary.

**Abbate:**

And was that some binary peculiar to this one machine?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, that’s right. And it had this rotating drum—well, actually, that
was the normal form of storage in those days. But you had to arrange the
programs so that when you’d done your instruction, it either had to be
on—the next instruction had to be on the next location of the drum; or
else, if you jumped it, you had to try to get it to a place where it
would have rotated to about the right place, in order to make it work.
Which was quite fun\! \laughs\

**Abbate:**

So you would have had to have a lot of awareness of how the hardware
worked.

**Dollimore:**

Yes, you did for that one.

**Abbate:**

Was that also true of the Ferranti machine?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, and in fact even some other machines I used after that. It wasn’t
at quite such a low level as that. In the case of the Ferranti machine,
the Mercury, you knew that it had a certain number of registers—they
called them “B registers,” I think—which were sort of places that you
could store things. There were a certain number of those, and so you had
to organize your program just to use the number of those that were
available—and then if you ran out of those, you’d put the numbers in
memory somewhere. And you sort of had to work . . . it’s similar to
doing assembly code programming, even these days, actually.

**Abbate:**

Did that have mercury delay lines? Is that why it was called Mercury?

**Dollimore:**

No, it just was called Mercury, because it sound like a Greek god\!
\laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Nothing to do with the storage technology.

So . . . We got to your master’s degree at Birkbeck.

**Dollimore:**

Yes. So when would that be? ‘60 or ‘61 or something like that.

### Working as a Computer Programmer

**Abbate:**

What was your first job after that?

**Dollimore:**

As a programmer? I went to various . . . I went for interviews at
various sorts of companies that wanted programmers; but then Being a bit
feeble, I decided to go there, rather than, you know, dress up in a
smart suit, and work at a company\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Were the companies willing to hire?

**Dollimore:**

I went to some interviews, and yes, I was offered jobs. But they were
mostly in rather inconvenient locations. That was probably my main
motivation against them. Everybody said, “Oh she’s mad—she only works
when it’s near\!” \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Was there any sense that they had different jobs for men and women at
these companies?

**Dollimore:**

I doubt it. I think it was the same, to be quite honest. Some of those
jobs, you sort of took some type of aptitude test; and if you passed it,
you were rather inclined to be offered something.

**Abbate:**

I’ve seen some of those.

**Dollimore:**

Yes, I know, they’re like the sort of things they do with children when
they’re in school, isn’t it? Testing I.Q.s and so on . . .

**Abbate:**

So you ended up taking this job in a chemistry department. That was
still at Birkbeck?

**Dollimore:**

That was at University College. That was probably 1961\. It’s really
hard to remember the exact dates.

So, that was quite interesting. I was just doing various jobs for
various people in the department, but the people that mainly needed
programs were the crystallographers. I wrote a whole lot of programs for
them, and it sort of became like a suite of programs. That was quite
interesting, trying to integrate them.

**Abbate:**

So were you figuring out the algorithms and coding them as well?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, yes. Well, for some of them, it was well-known what the formula was
you had to do, actually; but then you had to turn that formula into an
algorithm, I suppose.

**Abbate:**

That sounds quite challenging.

**Dollimore:**

I was trying to think if I had got any research out of . . . The
master’s degree, I actually did manage to publish a paper on the
results of that. And then, I think, one of these crystallographic
programs, I managed to publish something on that. So, you know, it was
beginning to be something a bit better than just being a programmer, I
suppose\!

**Abbate:**

Did those programs get used other places?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, they were, actually, because by then we’d got the Atlas computer:
there was one in London, one in Manchester, and there was something
called a Titan in Cambridge that was related. Certainly the people using
London and Manchester were using those programs; and then, not many
other universities had computers, so I suppose they were probably using
the programs in London and Manchester. So it seemed worthwhile.

**Abbate:**

It seems like there was a lot of sharing of software—maybe still, but
certainly in those early days.

**Dollimore:**

Yes, yes there was—often by quite primitive methods, like people posting
things to one another\! \laughs.\ No email or anything like that.

**Abbate:**

Mail a deck of punch cards?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, that’s right\!

**Abbate:**

Would you know who had done the software—who had programmed it—if you
got a copy of software from some other university?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, I think so. I think we always put our names on it somewhere\!
\laughs.\ Yes, we did know. When I come to think about other people’s
compilers and things that I used—often you would go and visit them,
because you could not understand how to make them work\! \laughs.\

### Computer Programming Languages

**Abbate:**

I was wondering if you ever got a phone call from someone: “How do I . .
.?”

**Dollimore:**

Yes, because in fact, when the Atlas came, there was a bit of a debate
as to what programming language to use. There was the option of using
FORTRAN(FORTRAN "FORTRAN"); and then the people in Manchester
developed their own language, called Atlas Autocode, which was the one I
chose to use for my programs; and the people in London Institute of
Computer Science were developing a language of their own. So it was all
very chaotic. \laughs.\ So I do remember going to Manchester, and
talking to the people that designed the Atlas Autocode, because I
couldn’t understand how to make it do certain things.

**Abbate:**

Did that limit the usability of the programs?

**Dollimore:**

Well in fact not, because there was only really this one computer that
everybody was running it on\! It’s true that if I had used FORTRAN, it
would have been runnable on other computers, so that . . . Many years
later, we changed to a CDC machine, I think, which didn’t run Atlas
Autocode. But it had had quite a long run in terms of time.

But there did come that time when everybody started using FORTRAN. Don’t
ask me when it was\! Because FORTRAN, in fact, came out in the mid-’50s,
didn’t it?

**Abbate:**

Yes, but it sort of wasn’t universal. I thought FORTRAN ‘77 was some
sort of milestone. I also don’t know, in terms of over here . . .

**Dollimore:**

Yes, well, by then there were other languages, like ALGOL, which were
much higher-level than FORTRAN. I think FORTRAN ‘77 was trying to sort
of fix some of those things, by putting things like IFELSE in the
language, instead of just IF \laughs\, and making a more useful sort
of FOR loop, and things like that.

But there were people in industry that went on using it—I suppose
probably still do use FORTRAN\! I don’t know.

**Abbate:**

As far as I know. They still use COBOL . . .

Did they have?—They must have had a Y2K problem here.

**Dollimore:**

Well, there was a big panic about it, but nothing much happened here.

**Abbate:**

Did they start calling on people who had retired years ago, and try to
get them out of retirement to fix it?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, yes\! But in fact nothing really happened. \laughs.\

### Moving to the Institute of Computer Science

**Abbate:**

Let’s see. Where have we gotten? At the Institute of Computer Science,
you were talking about . . .

**Dollimore:**

The stage I had sort of got to in the history was when I was still
working as a programmer at University College. Then I suppose the
Institute wanted to centralize things a bit, and they offered me a job
to sort of look after crystallographic programs—you know, sort of in a
more organized way—and that’s how I got into the Institute of Computer
Science. But I was still just a . . . I was still just a programmer,
really, although I think they called me a Research Assistant.

**Abbate:**

Okay, and this, the Institute of Computer Science was set up by the
University of London, to sort of centralize . . .

**Dollimore:**

Yes, to be—like I said, it was to do research in computer science, which
was mostly writing compilers and things like that. It also provided a
service to the University, because at that stage, I suppose they had the
only computer.

A few years later, it split into two parts: The University of London
Computer Center and the Institute. And then later on, the Institute was
disbanded into the various colleges. But that was—I think it was ‘73 it
got disbanded. And I suppose Sylvia \Wilbur\ was right when she said a
lot of them did go to University College; but about three of us came to
Queen Mary—and then probably a larger number, like half a dozen, went to
Imperial College.

**Abbate:**

So you were at the Institute until it disbanded?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, that’s right. But I was hardly there; I had about six months or so.
And then we got to—that was working full-time; then we got to 1964, when
I had my first child. They kept me on doing this job, because I suppose
there was more just fixing things than actually trying to be creative
and doing new things; and I sort of said, “Well, make it half-time,” so
they made it half-time. They let me work at home quite a lot, and there
was someone there who used to make my amendments to the programs, and
run them, and print them out, and post them to me\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

So you were able to work part-time, sort of maintaining programs that
you had done?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, that’s right\! So that went on for years and years, because I had
three children in the end. I suppose I went back full-time at the . . .
No I didn’t—but I started going back into the Institute, as opposed to
working at home.

**Abbate:**

So when you worked at home, you would sort of code things on paper and
then mail them in?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, that’s right\! It’s funny, isn’t it? \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

So you didn’t have dial-up lines at that point.

**Dollimore:**

Definitely not. I didn’t have a computer at home. So it was really just
working on paper.

Let’s think . . . My third child was born in ‘68, so I suppose it was
only getting towards about ‘72 or so that I started actually going into
the Institute again, but that was still only at half-time; and then
about a year later they disbanded the Institute, and I moved down here
\to Queen Mary\.

### Moving to Queen Mary College

**Abbate:**

You started here in seventy . . .

**Dollimore:**

‘73—Autumn ‘73, I think. And they—they were still calling me a Research
Assistant at that stage, because it was as though the job just moved
from the Institute to here. Actually, by then I’d started doing some
other work, because really, the crystallographic stuff was pretty well
finished. In fact . . . it’s hard . . . There was someone I knew, a
psychiatrist who was doing work with EEGs, and I started doing some
programming for him. It was still sort of officially Institute work
though. And in fact we got quite a lot of publications out of that,
which made me a bit more respectable than I really was\! \laughs.\ I
don’t put them on my C.V. now; it was so long ago.

But that sort of gave me something to do. And that was what I was doing
when I came here. But when I came here, I found that—I began to find out
what computer science really was. \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Because up to now, you’d been . . .

**Dollimore:**

It had been just applications.

**Abbate:**

. . . programming?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, that’s right.

**Abbate:**

What were you doing when you first came here, besides finishing up the
other projects?

**Dollimore:**

Well there was a lab here, where people were—you know, there was some
computers that you could do interactive programming with, and I, I sort
of tried various projects, one to do with handwriting recognition—I
mean, nothing much came of that, but . . .

A lot of it was just learning, to be quite honest. And then they got me
to teach a course. I think that was “FORTRAN for Physicists,” or
something like that\! And then eventually I became a lecturer, and . . .

It really took years to catch up with the subject though, to be quite
honest. Because, I think—I think Sylvia probably mentioned the COSMOS
project; this was the first project that I was involved in, as well. It
was . . .

### Working on the COSMOS Project

**Abbate:**

I’m not sure. That’s an acronym?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, it is. COSMOS is an acronym for “Computer Supported Message
Oriented System.” It was a project that we’d got with BT and Manchester
University, and Nottingham. I don’t know when it started—maybe ‘78? ‘80?
No, probably . . . It must have been after ‘80, because Sylvia was here,
but she hadn’t been here very long. It was a project to design a sort of
ambitious type of mail system where people could sort of do
collaborative working.

**Abbate:**

Oh, right. This is the computer-mediated . . .

**Dollimore:**

Yes, that’s right. Yes, that’s it.

**Abbate:**

I guess I didn’t get the acronym.

**Dollimore:**

It was a four-year funded research project, and we had Research
Assistants, and . . . This was when I started doing things. I suppose
I’d got my first Ph.D. student shortly before that. So really it was
only from about 1980 onwards that I was doing any research.

### Specializing in Distributed Systems and Writing a Book

**Abbate:**

So, what did you specialize in?

**Dollimore:**

Well, distributed systems is really what I ended up specializing in. And
I suppose this messaging was the beginning of that interest in that. I
suppose before that, I’d been trying to find out what area to go into,
and then distributed systems seemed to be something that I enjoyed
doing.

**Abbate:**

What kind of projects have you done in distributed computing?

**Dollimore:**

There was another one—it was a strange project, actually—the sort of
crazy thing that happens with European funding. You know \laughs\:
There was a company in Germany, a hardware company in Germany; and a
software company in the Netherlands; and there was also—I think there
were some people from Sussex University . . . It’s hard to remember who
they all were. And there was this project to—well, the hardware company
were going to sort of make this very powerful workstation, with advanced
graphics—oh, that’s where the Sussex people came in, and somebody that
used to be in this department; they were into graphics. But for some
reason we said distributed systems was important, and we’d do a
distributed Smalltalk; and we actually did quite a lot of work over
that, and I think three of my Ph.D. students worked on that. That worked
out very well, doing the distributed Smalltalk.

And then, about 1988, we wrote the first edition of this book I was
going on about. I work with—the person I live with is called George
Coulouris, who is a professor in the department from about the early
‘70s. The two of us wrote the first edition of this book on
distributed systems in 1988\. And then shortly after that, this young
chap Tim—who now is in America, the one who is at HP Research Labs—he
joined the department; and when we came to do the second edition, he
became an author with us, and that came out in ‘94\. And then the third
edition came out last summer. I’m going on about this book because you
said, “What are the highlights of your career?”

**Abbate:**

Well, it sounds like one.

**Dollimore:**

The third edition has been really successful, so far, and it seems as
though we learned how to get it right after three times\! \laughs\

**Abbate:**

I haven’t seen the book. Does this encompass distributed operating
systems and distributed programming of applications . . .

**Dollimore:**

Yes, yes, that’s right.

Yes, so, we start off with just introducing general concepts like the
Internet, and intranets, and stuff like that, and the Web. And then, in
the second chapter, we sort of try and go up to a higher level and
produce abstract models of things like interaction, and a fault model,
and a security model. And then we do a little bit about networking;
we’re assuming most people would have done networking in another
course. And then there’s something at the level just about—above
networking, about how processes communicate with one another. And then
we explain how you use Java to program those things. Of course, we
didn’t have Java in the other editions of the book; this made it much
more acceptable. And then, there’s sort of techniques: something called
“remote procedure calling,” which enables . . . You’ve heard of that?
That’s all explained in the book. And then there’s the chapter on
distributed operating systems, and one on computer security, and . . .
one on transactions and concurrency control.

**Abbate:**

It covers the bases, yes.

**Dollimore:**

Yes, it’s quite a long book\! It’s got about 700 pages\!

**Abbate:**

Has it changed a lot over the years?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, it has changed a lot. I suppose when we did the first edition, it
was mostly only master’s courses that were studying distributed systems;
whereas it’s become an undergraduate course in most universities—in this
country, I think, anyway; although a lot of the people in America that
are using it seem to be master’s courses.

One thing that’s been quite fun is—we’ve got a really good Web site for
the third edition, but we did have a Web site for the second edition, so
you get lots of feedback from students and teachers. They email you and
point out all the errors\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

So you’ve got a distributed publishing service\!

**Dollimore:**

Yes, that’s right. It’s quite
fun\!

### Reflection on Women in the Computer Science Department at Queen Mary College

**Abbate:**

Were you able to shape the curriculum in the computer science
department? To say, “This is important; we should teach it”?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, because I . . . We started by having a master’s. There was a
master’s degree that we had here, which was quite fun: it had four
different areas, one of the areas being distributed systems. In fact, it
was distributed and parallel systems, and Heather \Liddell\, with her
parallel interests, was involved in it as well. And that went on until—
In fact it finished just the year after I retired, because there wasn’t
anyone left to teach that, so they changed the orientation of it.

But then, about 1990, we had an undergraduate course in distributed
systems as well; so I’ve been able to teach that for quite a while.

**Abbate:**

Do you find that women end up in certain areas of computer science
disproportionately?

**Dollimore:**

I don’t think so. I don’t know so many women in computer science, to be
quite honest\!

**Abbate:**

Oh. I guess that would be another question. Is the . . .

**Dollimore:**

Because I suppose what Sylvia and Heather and I were doing was not so
far apart from one another, really—although we didn’t work together . .
.

**Abbate:**

Right—with the networking, and the parallel processing . . .

**Dollimore:**

Yes, yes. It’s at least the system side of things. Although the new
women in the department are working in information retrieval, which is
something I’ve never even heard of\!

**Abbate:**

Well, there’s a lot of women in that.

**Dollimore:**

Are there?

**Abbate:**

Partly because there’s an overlap with sort of library science, and
places that women have traditionally been . . . This is one of the
things I’m trying to figure out—if the women end up more in some areas
than others. For example, artificial intelligence seems to have a lot of
women.

**Dollimore:**

Yes, because in fact—I don’t know if you’re interviewing Hilary
Buxton—she used to be in this department.

**Abbate:**

Sylvia had mentioned her . . .

**Dollimore:**

She’s now at Sussex, but she’s AI.

**Abbate:**

I don’t remember if I’ve heard from her. She might be on my list. I’m
not talking to her this time around . . .

**Dollimore:**

She’s a good deal younger than we are, so you can get her next time you
come out\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

But some other people, like—

**Dollimore:**

I suppose that Karen Sparck-Jones?

**Abbate:**

And Alison Adam.

**Dollimore:**

No, I don’t know her.

**Abbate:**

She does AI at University of Salford in Manchester.

**Dollimore:**

Of course, when I was chair of the Examiners, I always insisted on
getting female External Examiners—much to everybody’s amazement\!
\laughs.\ I was trying to think who they all were\! I had Jean Bacon
for one of them . . .

**Abbate:**

What are External Examiners?

**Dollimore:**

The universities sort of watch each other’s standards, and so . . .

**Abbate:**

Okay.

**Dollimore:**

. . . you know, you have two people from other universities who come to
your Examiners’ meetings, and . . .

**Abbate:**

Okay, yes.

**Dollimore:**

Another one was Heather Brown from Kent. I suppose you know about her.

**Abbate:**

She, she’s . . .

**Dollimore:**

Of course, she is in information, really, isn’t she?

**Abbate:**

Is she in Plymouth or something?

**Dollimore:**

She’s Kent . . . although she spends time in Cambridge, actually, but .
. . Who else did we have? It’s hard to remember.

**Abbate:**

That’s interesting. Why did you want women?

**Dollimore:**

Well I just thought, “Well, they’ve always had two men; why not get one
man and one woman\!” \laughs.\ It would have been a bit hard to get
two women\!

**Abbate:**

No, that’s interesting. I don’t really know the system that well, but is
that a way that contacts are made, or that . . . ?

**Dollimore:**

It’s not very important for that. I suppose people tend to ask other
people that they know to do it. And, it’s just—this is just for the
undergraduate exams, which is the main part of your examining. I just
happened to be chair of the Exam Board for several years, and so I had
to get these people. So I just thought, “Well, let’s get some . . .”

**Abbate:**

Have you made efforts to encourage women to study here, or to try to
make them comfortable once they’re here?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, because we have tutor groups, and we’ve had sort of phases of
having all-girl tutor groups. I don’t know if they do at the moment, but
just now and again there was this idea that if the female members of
staff had a lot of the girls in their tutor groups, it would make it
easier for them.

**Abbate:**

And did it?

**Dollimore:**

But it’s hard to remember whether they discontinued that practice or . .
.

It was quite peaceful having all these girls\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Did you get the sense that it was helpful to them?

**Dollimore:**

I think it probably was. I mean, they were only coming and seeing you
for an hour or maybe two hours each week, and, you know, working through
problems with them. I think when there were mixed tutor groups, there
was a bit of sort of competitiveness, whereas the girls didn’t seem to
compete with one another very much. But, you know, it’s hard to
generalize about these things. I suppose I’d quite often had female
project students. I didn’t particularly go out of my way to have
them—but they probably went out of their way to get me.

### Reflection on Professional Societies

**Abbate:**

Have you been very active in professional societies?

**Dollimore:**

No, absolutely not\! I’m afraid I’m useless\!

**Abbate:**

Well, that’s up to you. I don’t even know—it’s a funny field—I don’t
know what societies would even be most appropriate for what you do.
Would that be the British Computer Society? Or the IEE?

**Dollimore:**

I probably should have joined the BCS, just because the BCS likes the
staff at the colleges to be members. You know, because all the students
want to be members, and we sign the forms for them.

**Abbate:**

I see.

**Dollimore:**

It’s a bit funny for them that we’re not members\!

**Abbate:**

What advantage would it be to be a member of the British Computer
Society?

**Dollimore:**

Well you’d get something called the Computer Journal, that . . . They do
hold meetings: talks and things. I have actually given one of their
talks, but I’ve never become a member.

**Abbate:**

I guess—in the States they tend to be more—they hold conferences, and
they publish journals, and that seems to be their main function.

**Dollimore:**

Yes. Well they do publish this journal—but I don’t think being a member
would make any difference to whether you could publish in it\!

**Abbate:**

It just makes it cheaper.

### As a Woman in the Field of Computer Programming

**Abbate:**

Have you ever felt, as a woman, that you’ve encountered any kind of
discrimination, or even just—I don’t know, sexist comments, or any kind
of . . . ?

**Dollimore:**

On the whole, not. There have been sexist comments, but it’s always been
in a place where there were a lot of people about, and somebody always
shuts the person up. And I don’t think it’s very intentional; you know,
some people just got used to saying these male chauvinist things\!
\laughs.\ And somebody says, “You know, you watch out, Jean’ll hit
you\!” So Jean doesn’t hit them because they said that, but . . . But,
you know, it’s been a very small minority of people that have acted like
that. Considering there were only ever about three women on the academic
staff out of about 25\. It’s been very, very easy to carry on.

**Abbate:**

And does it seem like promotion and . . .

**Dollimore:**

I don’t think that made any difference. No.

**Abbate:**

Is there any kind of glass ceiling?

**Dollimore:**

Well, you might think so by the numbers; but I think there just weren’t
enough of us around to—to make professor, say.

**Abbate:**

So you think that as more women come in, they’re kind of marching up the
ranks?

**Dollimore:**

Well, I didn’t feel that any of us were held back because we were
females; but I haven’t studied the whole country.

**Abbate:**

I just wanted your own perception.

**Dollimore:**

But this always seemed a very friendly department.

**Abbate:**

It does, from what I can tell.

**Dollimore:**

So maybe it’s nicer here than it is in most other places\!

**Abbate:**

I’ve definitely heard some hair-raising stories from other places; but
not from here. So that sounds good.

### Reflections on Career in Computing

**Abbate:**

What have you found the most satisfying aspect of being in computing?

**Dollimore:**

I enjoy programming, to be quite honest\! Not that I’ve done any since
I’ve retired . . . You know, and solving those sort of problems. It
might not be exactly programming, but sort of thinking about practical
scenarios: distributed systems, and then trying to think how you make
something work, and then what are the details, and . . .

**Abbate:**

So partly the intellectual challenge, but partly having something work
at the end?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, exactly, have something working.

**Abbate:**

. . . that has some real-world value to it.

**Dollimore:**

Yes\! Yes—because although I really did like mathematics very much, I
think I would have found it a bit too dry to actually do for years and
years on end. You know, just fighting your way through some
equations—whereas you’ve always got feedback from a program.

**Abbate:**

It sounds like you . . . like a lot of these products are collaborative,
are sort of a team of people. Is that more typical of the kind of work
you do, that it’s a multi-person task?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, it has been, actually. It’s only on a small scale, like, sort of
maybe two or three academic staff, and two or three Ph.D.s or research
assistants, or something like that.

**Abbate:**

Do you like that, or is that . . . ?

**Dollimore:**

No, it’s about right for me. There was one place that we visited, one
year—about 1994, I think it was—we’d both of us managed to get
sabbaticals at the same time, and we went to Grenoble in France, where
there’s a big lab of people doing distributed systems. And you know,
you’ve got twenty people doing distributed systems, plus all their
Ph.D.s\! That was very exciting for us, because there were always just
the three of us. It’s so different being able to wander around and talk
to all of these different people. You had to know where they’re doing\!

**Abbate:**

How did they manage that?

**Dollimore:**

Well . . . I think it’s changed now in France, but they had a lot of
government funding for research labs in France at that period. So
although these people did some teaching in the university, they were
mostly . . . they were just sitting in this research lab doing research,
all the rest of the time, and . . . But there were sort of maybe about
ten of these labs, in various places in France, that you could go to.

**Abbate:**

Did you have to find your own funding for projects, here?

**Dollimore:**

Oh, definitely, but it was either from a U.K. funding body, or from the
European Union funding, so . . .

**Abbate:**

So were you—did you write grant applications a lot?

**Dollimore:**

Well, not a lot\! I mean I did—I wrote more than I succeeded in,
obviously\! There was another project that I hadn’t mentioned yet, that
was the last . . . I’m trying to think . . . I’ve somehow missed out
telling you about two projects\!

**Abbate:**

Oh, please do\!

### Working on Projects in the Field

**Dollimore:**

The most recent . . . There was another European-funded one, which—in
fact, it extended slightly after I’d retired—which was—the leader of the
project was a chap called Marc Shapiro, who worked in one of those
institutes in Paris. He set it up, together with us, and one of our
friends from Grenoble, and then we also got some people from Portugal,
and—where else? I can’t remember; it doesn’t really matter. This was
again a project about cooperative working, but it wasn’t like using
messaging, like that first one I described; it was more like running the
same software on each computer in a distributed system: say, one in
Paris, one in Lisbon, one in London, or whatever. And, so, the people in
Paris were developing the basic platform for it, and we were working on
security here, and we had a research assistant who was doing that, and
one of my Ph.D. students was also working on security, so that one was
interesting. That was probably the most friendly one, in that, although
we had all these people in different countries, everybody got on very
well with one another. We all enjoyed going on the Eurostar to Paris and
having the meetings\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

What became of that system?

**Dollimore:**

Well \laughs\, like all of them, nothing much\! But, you sort of put
it on the Web at the end, and then people express interest, and . . .

**Abbate:**

I mean, does it sort of spin off into . . . people take ideas and . . .

**Dollimore:**

Well in fact, there is always supposed to be a company that will exploit
it. In fact . . .

**Abbate:**

When you say “always,” you mean for the European projects?

**Dollimore:**

Yes; this is how you write the proposal. In fact, there was a German CAD
company that was involved with it, and they did make it run on their
computers; but I suspect they won’t do anything with it. And then there
was the French Building Research . . . what’s it called? It was sort of
like our Building Research Lab . . . but they were involved in it as
well, and they were interested in it.

I think actually it’s more just that the ideas come out of it. The
actual software you build: People download it, and run it a bit, and
sort of see what they can do with it.

**Abbate:**

So it’s more a sort of proof of concept? Work out ideas, and . . .

**Dollimore:**

Because we did get lots of publications out of it, so I suppose people
will carry on with the ideas. In fact, some of them are still working on
something related; but I decided that as I was retiring, I was retiring.
\laughs.\ And that was the end of it\!

**Abbate:**

Did you tell me the name of that project? I don’t remember.

**Dollimore:**

No\! What was it called? Heavens\! I don’t remember.

**Abbate:**

Probably some terrible acronym?

**Dollimore:**

Ah, PERDIS—that was it\!

**Abbate:**

P-E-R-D-I-S?

**Dollimore:**

Persistent Distributed Memory, it was meant to be. Yes, P-E-R-D-I-S\!
\laughs\

Well, the first time we wrote the proposal, we called it “Musketeers”—I
mean in French: “Mousquetaires\!” But then that . . . When they make you
rewrite it, they want you to put it in with a different name.

**Abbate:**

Just because . . .

**Dollimore:**

Bureaucracies\!

The other recent thing was this chap Tim who went to the States. He was
really the leader in that. He wrote this proposal—with our help,
actually—that was called the Mushroom Project. And that, again, was
about collaborative working, but this time more tightly coupled Java
programs, still on distributed—working on different workstations; but it
was supposed to help medical people, and he did a case study of
treatment of diabetics. And then, although it was a basic platform that
should be able to support various types of collaborative working, they
actually made a program that could be used by the carers for diabetic
patients, and we had people from the London Hospital involved in it, and
they did come along and . . .

**Abbate:**

So . . . People caring for them at home would have this, or people in
hospitals?

**Dollimore:**

No, it’s just in the hospital, and the G.P.’s Surgery.

**Abbate:**

I see.

**Dollimore:**

So that, that was quite interesting\! That finished last June I think,
actually.

**Abbate:**

What’s Tim’s last name?

**Dollimore:**

Kindberg.

**Abbate:**

Kindberg. Is that K-I-N-D?

**Dollimore:**

B-E-R-G. Yes, that’s right.

**Abbate:**

Is he American, or does he just work there?

**Dollimore:**

He’s English. His wife’s American, and I think they had a sort of
agreement that after ten years, maybe they’d go to the States for a
while. He got a good job, so . . .

**Abbate:**

I’ll bet\!

**Dollimore:**

You bet\! That’s right\!

**Abbate:**

Have we missed any big milestones?

**Dollimore:**

Of course I’ve done loads of teaching in that time.

### Reflections on Teaching Computing

**Abbate:**

Right, of course. How much . . . How do they structure that here? How
many courses do you teach?

**Dollimore:**

Recently, it’s just been two each year, one undergraduates and one
master’s course, basically. So, I always had a distributed systems
master’s course and a distributed systems undergraduate course—but then,
I usually had a fairly large second-year programming course, which
towards the end became Java programming. I’d always wanted to teach
object-oriented programming, you know, so it was really nice that
suddenly this marvelous language turned up\! So . . . As soon as it
appeared on the scene, I said, I’ve got to teach Java in the second
year. And it was so popular with the students\!

**Abbate:**

I’ll bet\!

**Dollimore:**

I thought they wouldn’t know what it was, and I made this Web page
saying, “Java is good because of this and that,” you know\! “You can do
graphics without getting some funny library, and you can do distributed
systems, and you can do this and you can do that.” But then they all
came in really keen\! And it was such fun\! So I suppose about the last
three or four years of teaching that second-year course, I’ve really
enjoyed it—which was nice.

**Abbate:**

So that sounds like another—something else that you really enjoyed.

**Dollimore:**

Yes\! I mean, before that, it was always a bit of a drag, because—I
can’t go back a long way, but before the Java, I think it was mostly
C++ I was teaching, and I never liked the language, although it’s
supposed to be object-oriented. And I used to tell the students all
these bad things about the language, and they’d say “Why do you teach us
that if it’s so bad?\!” It’s hard to convey the benefits of object
orientation when using such a poor example of it.

\TAPE 1, SIDE 2\

### Balancing Work and Family

**Abbate:**

Have you had a lot of trouble balancing work and family? Now, you had
three children . . .

**Dollimore:**

Three children. Quite honestly, I didn’t do much work when they were
younger.

**Abbate:**

So you were working part-time . . .

**Dollimore:**

I was working part-time, and I was not keeping up with the developments
in the subject. I think I was just happy to work part-time, because I
had something different to do. I didn’t particularly want to be going in
to work every day, and—and you know, having child minders, and stuff\!

So, I suppose it wasn’t until the youngest one was about 12, 14,
something like that, that I really got going again.

**Abbate:**

Was it hard to get back into . . . back into computing after . . .

**Dollimore:**

Well the thing was, I wasn’t ever totally out.

**Abbate:**

Right . . .

**Dollimore:**

You know, so . . . And there were loads of people like me that sort of
came out of other subjects, and hadn’t been properly trained. There
wasn’t really anybody with computer science degrees in those days, so
. . .

**Abbate:**

So in a way, it was a good field for someone who wanted to take some
time out?

**Dollimore:**

For someone who wanted to mess about\! Yes, that’s right.

**Abbate:**

Because, it wasn’t like you were on some track, and if you stepped off,
you could never get on again . . .

**Dollimore:**

Yes. It’s different now. I mean, women academics that have babies
usually take a few months off and then come back and work full time. I
don’t know . . . I presume some of them stop, but I think it would be
much harder for them. I suppose if you’re clever, though, you can do
anything, can’t you? \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Did you have any role models or mentors, or people who sort of
encouraged you along the way?

**Dollimore:**

Just colleagues, I think, actually. Not, not really role models.

**Abbate:**

So you had a supportive community around you?

**Dollimore:**

Yes, yes, that’s right\! Because in fact, I would say I had a lot of
support from this George who I now live with, and—but when I first came
to Queen Mary, he was running this lab that was doing all the exciting
things, and I got a lot of encouragement from him and his group. It’s a
bit difficult to disentangle the sort of personal—I mean, it certainly
wasn’t any sort of a relationship at the beginning. But he certainly
helped me a lot. But then, on the other hand, this chap Tim—I mean, he’s
years younger than me—he’s only sort of fortyish now—but somehow, just
working with him, very closely and collaboratively, that’s helped a lot,
too.

**Abbate:**

Do you know a lot of . . . Is there sort of a community of women in
computer science?

**Dollimore:**

There might be, but I’m not in it.

**Abbate:**

Not that you’ve experienced.

**Dollimore:**

Yes. This person Hilary Buxton that we mentioned was very keen on women
into computing, and having meetings of that sort, and she might be able
to tell you, if there was.

**Abbate:**

Well I . . . I really meant in your experience. If you go to a
conference . . .

**Dollimore:**

I suppose you do tend to talk to the women; it’s just easier. Yes, that
does happen.

**Abbate:**

Has the proportion of women changed a lot?

**Dollimore:**

The proportion . . . Not really. I mean . . . That PERDIS project: I was
the only woman that went to those meetings\!

**Abbate:**

But if you go, if you go to a computing conference—I don’t know which
ones you go to . . .

**Dollimore:**

It’s quite, quite low, I think. It may depend a bit on the subject
area—because there’s something called European SIGOPS, more of a
workshop than a conference, but it is for people interested in
distributed systems and operating systems and . . .

**Abbate:**

So this is a Special Interest Group for Operating Systems?

**Dollimore:**

It’s a sort of . . . Yes . . . It’s a sort of excuse for a lot of
Americans to come over to Europe\!

**Abbate:**

I see\!

**Dollimore:**

And I went to quite a lot of those. I didn’t go to the last one, I sort
of felt that I wouldn’t bother; but there were probably—only about a
fifth of the people there were women, I should think.

**Abbate:**

That sounds like about the percentage that’s in academic computer
science.

**Dollimore:**

You’re probably . . . probably right.

**Abbate:**

So about the same—which is today, not huge.

**Dollimore:**

Yes, I think so\! Yes.

### Reflections on the Field of Computing

**Abbate:**

How do you think computing has changed over the years you’ve been in the
field?

**Dollimore:**

It just develops like mad all the time\! This is why I decided to make a
clean cut when I retired, because . . . I mean, I obviously have to keep
up with the subjects related to the book, because we have to sort of do
new impressions, and make the corrections and answer the—answer the
questions from the readers and stuff; but I’m definitely not trying to
keep up with research. You know, it just is like being on a sort of
treadmill: it changes so fast\! And it’s very, very technical. But I
don’t think it’s any different in that change than it was before. The
field’s just expanded like mad, and it’s become much more applicable
than you’d expected. I mean you—you would hardly have believed even ten
years ago that everybody’d have a computer in their house, and be using
the World Wide Web, and sending email to one another\!

**Abbate:**

Do you think the culture of computing has changed? The type of people,
and the atmosphere, the way they interact?

**Dollimore:**

Possibly with young people coming into it. Hard to tell, because I don’t
know many of them, but . . . It must eventually reach a sort of
saturation, mustn’t it? Where it . . . I mean, it was always a very
challenging thing to do, because not many people could do it. I suppose
a lot of students still do it because of that. I suppose you’ll always
need programmers—but I think there’s a lot of people associated with it
that aren’t programmers; they’re just managers. And I suppose that’s
what the change is, really.

**Abbate:**

So it’s sort of mainstream, as opposed to some hard core of
technologists?

**Dollimore:**

Yes. Yes, I think so. But you won’t get rid of the technologists.
They’ll just be in the minority, I suppose\!

**Abbate:**

Just bring more—more other people along.

**Dollimore:**

I’ve come across a lot of people that say they work in computers, but
they don’t really have technical backgrounds. I mean, they know how to
tell people how to use their laptops or whatever . . .

**Abbate:**

So maybe the definition has expanded . . . .

**Dollimore:**

Yes, I think so.

### Final Reflections

**Abbate:**

Do you have any advice for young women who might be contemplating a
career in computing?

**Dollimore:**

I think it’s a good idea\! \laughs.\ I’ve enjoyed it. Although I
didn’t manage to persuade any of my children to do it\!

**Abbate:**

What do your children do?

**Dollimore:**

My daughter’s a teacher; but she’s sort of not working at the moment,
because she had twins three years ago, and she has got another child.
And, the older of my two sons—He had a lot of trouble deciding what to
do, but he recently took a degree in international politics. And the
youngest one does up houses—and sells them, and buys another one.

**Abbate:**

You don’t think having two parents in computing discouraged them from
doing it?

**Dollimore:**

Well you see, their father was an architect, you know, and then, then we
separated and . . . . . . And then I got together with George, so, I
think they’d’ already decided what they were doing, by then.

**Abbate:**

Oh, I see. Do you have any grandchildren?

**Dollimore:**

Yes\! Yes: just three. My daughter’s got an eight-year old daughter, and
then these twins, who are, are nearly three\! I spend a day each week
just looking after them, actually.

**Abbate:**

Oh, that’s great\!

**Dollimore:**

Yes, it’s quite fun\! \laughs\

**Abbate:**

You can help with those work-and-family issues.

JD\! Yes\! Yes.

**Abbate:**

All right\! I think I’ve probably . . .

**Dollimore:**

I think you’ve probably found out most things\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Thanks very much for talking to me\! It was really fun.

**Dollimore:**

Well, you’re welcome\!

Retrieved from
"<http:/ethw.org/index.php?title=Oral-History:Jean_Dollimore&oldid=108535>"

Category(Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* Computing and
  electronics(Category:Computing_and_electronics "Category:Computing and electronics")

## Contents

* 1 About Jean Dollimore(#About_Jean_Dollimore)
* 2 About the Interview(#About_the_Interview)
* 3 Copyright Statement(#Copyright_Statement)
* 4 Interview(#Interview)
  * 4\.1 Background and Education(#Background_and_Education)
  * 4\.2 Introduction to Computer
    Programming(#Introduction_to_Computer_Programming)
  * 4\.3 Working as a Computer
    Programmer(#Working_as_a_Computer_Programmer)
  * 4\.4 Computer Programming
    Languages(#Computer_Programming_Languages)
  * 4\.5 Moving to the Institute of Computer
    Science(#Moving_to_the_Institute_of_Computer_Science)
  * 4\.6 Moving to Queen Mary College(#Moving_to_Queen_Mary_College)
  * 4\.7 Working on the COSMOS Project(#Working_on_the_COSMOS_Project)
  * 4\.8 Specializing in Distributed Systems and Writing a
    Book(#Specializing_in_Distributed_Systems_and_Writing_a_Book)
  * 4\.9 Reflection on Women in the Computer Science Department at
    Queen Mary
    College(#Reflection_on_Women_in_the_Computer_Science_Department_at_Queen_Mary_College)
  * 4\.10 Reflection on Professional
    Societies(#Reflection_on_Professional_Societies)
  * 4\.11 As a Woman in the Field of Computer
    Programming(#As_a_Woman_in_the_Field_of_Computer_Programming)
  * 4\.12 Reflections on Career in
    Computing(#Reflections_on_Career_in_Computing)
  * 4\.13 Working on Projects in the
    Field(#Working_on_Projects_in_the_Field)
  * 4\.14 Reflections on Teaching
    Computing(#Reflections_on_Teaching_Computing)
  * 4\.15 Balancing Work and Family(#Balancing_Work_and_Family)
  * 4\.16 Reflections on the Field of
    Computing(#Reflections_on_the_Field_of_Computing)
  * 4\.17 Final Reflections(#Final_Reflections)

![Powered by
MediaWiki(resources/assets/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)](//www.mediawiki.org/)
![Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki(extensions/SemanticMediaWiki/includes/../resources/images/smw_button.png)](https://www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 21 November 2014, at 10:45\.

* This page has been accessed 2,315 times.

* About ETHW(ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* Policies and disclaimers(ETHW:Policies "ETHW:Policies")

