Toggle navigation   

ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki(Main_Page)

* ** Go ****()
  * Browse by Subject(ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * Encyclopedia(Encyclopedia)
  
  * Oral Histories(Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * First Hand Histories(First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * LandmarksMilestones(Landmarks)
  
  * Archives(Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * Education(ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * Random page(Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * Help(Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * Contact us(Special:Contact)
  
  * 
  * Recent changes(Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * New pages(Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* ** Actions ****()
  * View
    source(index.php?title=Oral-History:Gillian_Lovegrove&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source e")
  
  * History(index.php?title=Oral-History:Gillian_Lovegrove&action=history "Past revisions of this page h")
  
  * 
  * Oral-History(Oral-History:Gillian_Lovegrove)
  
  * Discussion(index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Gillian_Lovegrove&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page t")
  
  * 
* ** Tools ****()
  * What links
    here(Special:WhatLinksHereOral-History:Gillian_Lovegrove "A list of all wiki pages that link here j")
  
  * Related
    changes(Special:RecentChangesLinkedOral-History:Gillian_Lovegrove "Recent changes in pages linked from this page k")
  
  * Special
    pages(Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages q")
  
  * Printable
    version(index.php?title=Oral-History:Gillian_Lovegrove&printable=yes "Printable version of this page p")
  
  * Permanent
    link(index.php?title=Oral-History:Gillian_Lovegrove&oldid=108425 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * Page
    information(index.php?title=Oral-History:Gillian_Lovegrove&action=info)
  
  * Browse
    properties(Special:BrowseOral-2DHistory:Gillian_Lovegrove)
* ** Account ****(# "Account")
  * Log
    in(index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3AGillian+Lovegrove)
  
  * 
  * Request account(Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Gillian Lovegrove

## About Gillian Lovegrove

Gillian Lovegrove is an influential woman in computing at Northumbria
University. She began her career at Cambridge where she earned a Masters
in Science. At Cambridge, she worked at the Maths Lab and on EDSAC as
part of the intellectual computing community; she was one of many women
who worked at the Cambridge Maths Lab. She taught at several
universities including Portsmouth and Southampton. She earned her PhD at
Southampton where she taught for several years. She became a University
Lecturer and later an Associate Dean at Staffordshire University and
Head of Department and Dean at Northumbria University where her main
subjects were Computing and Software Design. She is an Emeritus
Professor at Northumbria University.

In this interview, Lovegrove talks about growing up and her initial
interest in math and her years earning her degree and teaching at
Southampton. She also provides her reflections on the field of computing
and the role of women in the field.

## About the Interview

GILLIAN LOVEGROVE: An Interview Conducted by Janet Abbate for the IEEE
History Center, 20 September 2001

Interview \# 592 for the IEEE History Center, The Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
the IEEE History Center Oral History Program, IEEE History Center at
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ
07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include identification of
the specific passages to be quoted, anticipated use of the passages, and
identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Gillian Lovegrove, an oral history conducted in 2001 by Janet Abbate,
IEEE History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

## Interview

INTERVIEW: Gillian Lovegrove\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: 20 September 2001\
PLACE: Gillian Lovegrove's Office at the University of Northumbria at
Newcastle

\Notes courtesy of interviewer Janet Abbate\

### Background and Education

**Abbate:**

This is an interview with Gillian Lovegrove on September 20th, 2001\.

To start out with, can you tell me when you were born and where you grew
up?

**Lovegrove:**

I was born in 1942\. I was brought up in Yorkshire. I spent the first
eighteen years of my life in Hull—Beverley and Hull—in East Yorkshire,
and then I went to Cambridge University.

I went to a grammar school in Hull. It was a mixed boys’ and girls’
grammar school; it wasn’t just a girls-only. They were very keen on
education, but they didn’t have the specialists, particularly on the
science side: not enough of them. So they encouraged me to go into
maths, which I was good at—though I wanted to go into languages, which I
enjoyed\! \laughs.\ Anyway, they won, and my parents won, and I went
into the maths side, but felt immediately starved of humanity, so to
speak, and didn’t try very much at school when I had to specialize just
in maths. We have this system here where you keep broad up to about the
age of sixteen, and then you specialize. So I died a death as I
specialized in the maths.

**Abbate:**

So you were good at maths, but didn’t enjoy it that much?

**Lovegrove:**

I quite enjoyed the maths, but I didn’t like applied maths, and I
certainly didn’t like physics. So the pure maths, on the logic side: I
did enjoy that; but that meant that two-thirds of the things I was doing
were things that I didn’t get any thrill out of whatsoever.

And ironically, the teaching on the pure maths side, which was what I
enjoyed, was very poor to begin with. So I basically didn’t work very
much. I was very unhappy, really, in my sixth form.

**Abbate:**

So the three subjects were pure maths, applied maths, and physics?

**Lovegrove:**

Essentially, yes. It was called “double maths”: it was maths and further
maths, but it was split up into two parts. It was split up into the pure
and the applied, essentially, and the applied maths is very close to
physics—and physics is dry as death\! You know, it just didn’t appeal to
me at all.

**Abbate:**

So your parents were encouraging you . . .

**Lovegrove:**

My parents conspired with the school to persuade me\! \laughs.\
Because my father was looking at all the kinds of jobs that people could
get, and he knew that there were a lot more jobs in maths and science
than there were in the arts. And I really wanted to do French, German,
and as many Mediterranean languages as I could, and just be a
translator—something like that—and see the world. And they persuaded
me that there were far greater job opportunities in the other side.

**Abbate:**

What did your parents do for a living?

**Lovegrove:**

They were both teachers. One was a headmaster and the other one was a
domestic science teacher: cooking, needlework, that kind of thing.

**Abbate:**

So they were encouraging you to have a career?

**Lovegrove:**

They were certainly encouraging me to go to a university, yes.

**Abbate:**

Did you have any brothers or sisters?

**Lovegrove:**

Yes, I had a brother, younger. And he went to university as well.

**Abbate:**

Did he also do anything technical?

**Lovegrove:**

He was encouraged to go into an engineering course, yes; so he did. He
finished electronics and then became a teacher. So there was a very
strong parental influence. “Influence”: forcing\! \laughs.\
Encouraging.

**Abbate:**

You went to the local . . .

**Lovegrove:**

Grammar schools. And then, because I was very intelligent, I was in a
quick stream, so you actually finished the course a year early. I didn’t
do terribly well in the maths and the physics, and so the intention was
that I should repeat them the year after, which you could do; but you
could also apply to Oxford and Cambridge, which I then did. The way that
the entrance used to work in those days was that you took examinations,
and Oxford’s exams were in November, and Cambridge exams were in March.
So I did the Oxford exams, and got called up for interview, which was an
enormous surprise to me; and when I got there, I had a straight talk
from one of the tutors there, which absolutely riveted me and horrified
me at the time, but actually I now see was a tremendous guide towards
really the rest of my life. She said to me that the only reason I’d been
brought here for interview was because I’d had such a fantastic write-up
by my Headmaster; otherwise the level of my maths was just the same as
the other hundred and twenty girls who had applied for places. She asked
me also which was my first choice, Oxford or Cambridge; and I said,
“Cambridge, but of course I would like to come to Oxford, having seen
it.” But really she wasn’t interested, and I was absolutely affronted
and horrified—but also determined that if I was this close to getting
into Oxford, then maybe I would have a chance to get into Cambridge; and
there were four months in between.

**Abbate:**

. . . to study?

**Lovegrove:**

To study. And I was saying to one of the people at Oxford, one of the
girls from the first or second year, how much I would like to do extra
study for the exam, but I didn’t know half the stuff that was on the
papers; we just hadn’t covered it. We weren’t getting the teaching; they
actually hadn’t found a replacement teacher at my school for all the
pure-maths side. And this girl had come from a public school, and she
gave me all her notes, and I studied them for four months—I just took
the notes away—and I couldn’t believe it. The notes that she’d had from
her school were so self-explanatory; teaching like I’d never seen taught
before. It was fantastic\! I just did it after school; I just went back
and learned as much as I could, and then did the Cambridge exams, and
got a place\!

But it was because of that encounter at Oxford. At school, I didn’t
think I had a chance of getting into either Oxford or Cambridge. It’s
almost like a pattern: you think you haven’t got a chance of doing
something, and then something gives you that glimpse of what might be
possible, so you go for it—and then you get it. And then you look back
and you think, “Well, why did nobody else really say to me, ‘You’ve got
that chance’?” But then you realize that people around you can’t see
that perspective, because they’ve never had it themselves; so you’re a
pioneer, in the end.

I got to Cambridge, and I again found that maths . . . You did both pure
and applied maths: pure maths was fine; it interested me; but applied
maths just wasn’t, so I wasn’t in my right home subject area yet. I
really enjoyed Cambridge, because it had masses of music; it had masses
of sport; it had masses of men—they outnumbered us ten to one, and we
had this obligation to go out with as many as we could\! \laughs.\ So
I had a fantastic time, and worked as much as I could in between having
a fantastic time, and survived it okay. On the way, I met several
men—boyfriends; influences—some of whom showed me about computing, and
I loved it.

**Abbate:**

And this was the early sixties at this point?

**Lovegrove:**

This was 1961 to ‘64\. So this was about ‘63, ‘64 that they showed me
programs. And I thought, really, “I love this\! Gosh, you do it with
your hands, and you work it out logically, and you get something; and
then you correct it, and you have another go, and you stick it in a
computer. This is just my thing\! I love this\!”

**Abbate:**

So someone just showed you this in their spare time? You weren’t taking
it in a class or anything?

**Lovegrove:**

No, it wasn’t in a class. It was actually during a holiday. And the
influence was—and of course, this is a pattern you often find—it’s
somebody who’s older; it’s male, as it happens; and encourages you by
saying, “You can do this. It’s not a problem to you; it’s not difficult.
You can understand it.” And in my research in women in computing, I’ve
found that that often is the influence: that there’s an elder brother,
or an uncle or a father—it can be female as well, of course, but you
don’t often come across that as much—who says, “It’s not difficult.
It’s fun\!” And you go and have a go.

So, when I finished my maths course: I loved Cambridge, and I wanted to
stay there another year, because I didn’t want to leave the vicinity
yet. I had three choices: I could do the diploma in statistics; the
diploma in computing (both of which were like M.Sc.’s); or I could go
into teaching. Well, I tried statistics, and it didn’t grab me. I
couldn’t really do it. I loved the computing. I thought about the
teaching, and I went for an interview at the teaching college, but I
thought really the computing had more zizz, pizzazz: more excitement
about it. When I went for the interview for the teaching, the woman
there said to me, “Why do you want to go and do computing?” I said I
wanted to teach eventually, but I thought I wanted to teach computing.
“Why do you want to teach computing? Nobody’s going to teach
computing. They aren’t going to have computers in schools or anything\!”
\laughs.\ So I thought, “This isn’t my scene\!” and I did the diploma
in computing instead.

I then felt at home. This was where I wanted to be. This is what I
wanted to work in. I loved it. The whole organization inside the
computers; the way they organized the software; the logic of the
software; the operating systems; the language translations; the hardware
was also interesting—it helped me to find out where it all started and
stopped; how it all worked. I just loved the whole organization thing.

### Learning at Cambridge Maths Lab and Working on EDSAC

**Abbate:**

What was the content of the course at that point?

**Lovegrove:**

It was a typical kind of M.Sc. You had various units—modules—and then
you had a dissertation. And the units were: in 1964 you had some
numerical analysis to do, and apart from numerical analysis you had
things like programming, of course, but you also had operating systems,
and language translations, and you had the hardware. I can’t remember
the detail. When you look at our courses here, you can see that original
structure still existing: around it you’ve got some other exciting new
stuff to do with the Web, or to do with HCI \human-computer
interaction\, or multimedia; but in a way they’re the frills around the
main software engineering content. What they didn’t have in those days
was business analysis, or systems design in that sense—not at Cambridge,
anyway. Instead, they had more of the traditional university approach.
But it was ahead of its time in that really it was to do with software
engineering on big systems, and that was just thrilling to me.

During that diploma, I also rubbed shoulders with very influential
people, very bright people; but the whole atmosphere in the Cambridge
Maths Laboratory was very informal; there was no pomp and circumstance.
You were rubbing shoulders with these big guys, and they were just like
you. It was very like an American influence, actually. That whole
laboratory had a feeling that we were equals, which is not typically
British. You know: “Hey that’s a good idea. Let me give you my thoughts
on so-and-so.” All equal sharing. No kind of “Well, you’re only a
research student; I don’t want to know about you.” Nothing like that.
And it was therefore a very exciting environment to be in.

**Abbate:**

And there were, as I recall, a number of women in that lab.

**Lovegrove:**

Yes, there were. Actually, the Cambridge Maths Lab still has a good
number of women in it, I understand. We went to a reunion a couple of
years ago. But yes, it had a good proportion of women. Probably—I can’t
remember exactly: 30, 40 percent? Not so much the Professors and the
main Lecturers—they were mainly men—but because of this equals
atmosphere, you weren’t so much aware of that, because there were a lot
of other women doing the programming and the organization and helping
you on the course. So I was not aware of an overtly male atmosphere
there at all. Maybe that was because I’d just got used to that in
Cambridge. But I don’t think it was because of that. I think it was
because I just got total respect and bringing-on just like any of the
men did. I wasn’t aware of anything which wasn’t
pro–me-as-an-individual, just like all the rest.

**Abbate:**

And this was the EDSAC you were working on?

**Lovegrove:**

Yes, it was its last year. 1964 to ‘65 was the last year of EDSAC. And
then they moved to TITAN, which was like the ATLAS, that they made
themselves.

I remember that as a tremendous year. Looking back on it, again, I don’t
think I pushed myself forwards for a sufficiently stretching
dissertation, but I wasn’t aware of that. I really wasn’t aware of what
I could achieve. And I only became aware of it a bit late, when people
started talking to me about what they saw me doing in my career, and I
saw it through other people’s eyes. I still thought of myself as being
this woman who had accidentally got in there and was one of the lesser
people there. I see that as being partly through history, coming from a
grammar school—a mixed grammar school—in Hull, not a public school. I
didn’t think that I could achieve all of those things. And at Cambridge
you were surrounded by so many brilliant people that you didn’t see
yourself as being equal to them, so that it was some kind of privilege
that you were there.

**Abbate:**

Like it was a mistake \that you got in\.

**Lovegrove:**

\laughs.\ It was a mistake: I felt that quite a lot, but I think
that’s something personal to do with my own personal development as
well, that my self-esteem was not very good; and I still struggle with
that now. So the belief in myself wasn’t there, and I’d accidentally got
on this course, and . . .

Looking back, I think I didn’t stretch myself perhaps as much as I
might; but it didn’t really matter, because I had a different career
path to go down. I then got a job at Portsmouth—it was Portsmouth
College of Technology in those days, which later became Portsmouth
Polytechnic, and then later became University of Portsmouth—as a
Lecturer in computing, and for those times it was at a really high
salary. I went down there, found that the computing was fairly
elementary, and again, I didn’t feel I was in my right home; I was not
being able to do as much high-level computing as I wanted. So after a
couple of years there, I went to Southampton University and asked if I
could enroll as a research student and do research part-time. They
happened to be appointing a new professor there who had just come from
the Cambridge Maths Lab that I had left, who knew me; so I started doing
research under him, and after a year they invited me to apply for a
lectureship—which actually I didn’t get, but I was given a research post
in their Chemistry Department. Part of the intention of that was that I
not only did work for them, but I also kept going on my own Ph.D.; and a
year after that I got a lectureship at Southampton, and the year after
that, that was made permanent. And they did give me a lot of time to do
research.

**Abbate:**

Can I back up a second? So you had done a thesis or dissertation for the
master’s degree . . .

**Lovegrove:**

More or less, yes, at Cambridge. It was called a “diploma.” They don’t
give you other kinds of master’s at Cambridge. Because you get your M.A.
automatically, they don’t have master’s as such, so they call them
“diplomas,” but essentially it’s like a master’s.

**Abbate:**

What was the subject of that?

**Lovegrove:**

Its official title was “Numerical Analysis and Automatic Computation.”
Essentially it was numerical analysis and computing.

### Learning and Teaching at Southampton

**Abbate:**

And your Ph.D. dissertation: Was that . . .

**Lovegrove:**

The dissertation I did part-time at Southampton. That was essentially on
a kind of modular operating system with some real-time requirements, on
a small computer. You were doing real-time reorganizing the operating
system, taking real-time requirements from spectrometers and a plotter,
and you were trying to do it in such a way that it was almost getting
like object-oriented computing. You weren’t doing that yet; it wasn’t
quite so modular; but it was trying to do it in separate modules, which
could be, of themselves, self-contained and more easily updated and
changed. So you were moving towards objects, but it was rather early to
use that kind of concept.

**Abbate:**

Was operating systems your main area of interest at that point?

**Lovegrove:**

Yes. Again it was to do with organization: I love organizing things, and
I did enjoy that. We got into that gradually, but that really fired me
up, to have good working and good organization—which is how I run this
department\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

So the connection with the chemistry is that that was the application
for this operating system?

**Lovegrove:**

Well yes, that’s where I got the Research Fellowship. Yes, that was a
good application for it.

**Abbate:**

And so it was their instruments and lab work providing the data?

**Lovegrove:**

It was a little minicomputer, yes.

**Abbate:**

So you got the Ph.D. in the late sixties?

**Lovegrove:**

No. I took the job in Southampton in 1968, and I had one year as a
Research Fellow and then two years as a Lecturer, so that brought us to
1971\. I then became pregnant. I had intended to make more solid my
career before I became pregnant and actually we had bought a house which
was further away from Southampton, so it was all very inconvenient;
which meant that it was going to be far more difficult for me to try and
have a family and continue the career. So I gave up the career. I hadn’t
finished the Ph.D. at that time, because I’d only enrolled around about
1967 or ‘68\. I did want to finish the Ph.D., so I actually submitted it
a year after that, in 1972\. Then I had the corrections, but became
pregnant again, so I finally submitted it in 1974; so I got it in ‘74\.

Again, it’s this achievement thing: you can achieve it, but you have to
do it by small stages. All that time I was finishing that Ph.D., I
didn’t see it as a big thing, what I was doing. I kept thinking, “Why
can’t I do it perfectly the first time?” and “Why am I so slow
submitting these changes?”—instead of seeing it in the perspective of,
“This is a fantastic achievement, because you’ve got two young, small
children at home, and even to think about finishing your Ph.D. and
focusing on that is something very good\!” I didn’t see it like that; I
just saw that I really wasn’t being good enough. So I felt very
inadequate to it; but I was interested in teaching, and teaching
computing. I went on to have three children, and I was doing bits of
teaching at Portsmouth or at Southampton from time to time, but not
really working very much, just odd bits.

Then, in 1980, Southampton approached me again and said, would I apply
for a lectureship there? And I got a temporary lectureship, which was
confirmed the following year into a permanent lectureship. That was very
scary. I then took on full-time work when I had three small children:
the youngest one was two and a half, and the others were seven and
eight. I wasn’t sure I could do it. It was a tremendous struggle keeping
going on a daily basis. There was just so much to do. It wasn’t that
they overworked me; it was just that for anybody going back, you just do
not realize how much everything has changed in nine years: it was
already nine years. And on top of trying to keep the family going, that
was really, really tough. Those first six months, I think, were one of
the toughest periods I’ve ever had in my life.

Anyway, it took two or three years before I felt on my feet again. I was
learning a tremendous lot, because I was helping teaching, and being
given some notes, and then bringing myself on. At that time, they were
losing some staff, so I was actually moving around from course to
course—which was a tremendous and hard learning curve for me, but it’s
also very valuable. Naturally enough, I wasn’t regarded as being a
researcher or anything special in the group I was in, because I was on
this upward learning curve, and I don’t think there was a full
appreciation of just how tough that was. I didn’t know myself, to be
honest, so I’m not blaming anybody.

During the years coming up to my divorce in 1987, I was getting more and
more knowledgeable about myself; because I was having to deal with a
very difficult situation, I was reading a lot of books about
self-development. In 1987 I was 45 years old, and I count that as the
beginning of the rest of my life. Everything changed. I then had far
more control over my own destiny, if you like, because I could decide if
I had people in to help me at home, and how I ran the home, how I
organized my work life. And of course, I had this huge need to prove
myself. I wanted to do well in my career. I had three boys; I wanted the
boys to be well brought up, but I wanted my own career as well. I talked
about it with them all the time, and they understood that I needed to do
this; but they in their turn were also trying to acclimatize to this new
situation.

I continued on in my career, and started doing a lot more research. I
had a happy mind; I could work longer hours. I didn’t spend longer
working hours at the university; I came back home usually around tea
time, but then I would work at home in the evenings and in the weekends.

**Abbate:**

So it was possible to work at home?

**Lovegrove:**

Yes, that’s right. At first we had an au pair, and then we had somebody
who helped five days a week in the home.

**Abbate:**

And did you have a terminal at home? Or did you not need access to the
computer?

**Lovegrove:**

We had a BBC micro, which you could do some email from.

**Abbate:**

I’ve heard of those\!

### Reflecting on Personal Life

**Lovegrove:**

It was very limited in what it could do at home. But there was plenty of
other preparation that you could do.

Unfortunately, at the same time, I had other tragedies happening at
home. My mother died of cancer the year after I got divorced, and my
father was diagnosed with having Parkinson’s disease. These had enormous
effects upon me, in my self-confidence, in that I had so many things
going on. I actually had difficulty lecturing and talking in public, and
that kind of thing. This was around 1986, ‘87, ‘88\. It was just so
shattering, all of it; but gradually the self-confidence came back later
on after that, and I was able to lecture more normally. But again, this
feeling of not being equal to the occasion was huge, because I actually
wasn’t equal to the occasion, because I had so much going on. And I was
trying to. I knew inside myself that I was not valued for what I could
be—of course I wasn’t being valued for what I could be, because it
couldn’t come out\! But I was very frustrated, because I knew that there
was a person in here that had all this great history behind them, who
could do great stuff; but I couldn’t get the right kind of situation to
get it out.

**Abbate:**

How did you cope with balancing your various family responsibilities
with your work? Did you have any help with that?

**Lovegrove:**

I had had help from my parents during the years of the failing marriage,
and then I had help at home, in the house. I had various friends: women
who were trying to develop themselves through similar difficult
circumstances. They were my main allies. I had a colleague at work who
used some words like, “You don’t deserve this. You shouldn’t be in this
situation.” She also gave me an insight into the right as a woman to be
an equal to a man, where I was actually still under it, and not able to
see that. So she influenced me in two ways. This made me think, “No, I
can get out of this situation, if only I try a little harder.” And I’m
very, very stubborn and determined, and I wanted to persist at that; so
that did influence me to try to get out of these situations.

But if we look back at all that time, what that has given to me is an
enormous knowledge of people, and that people can grow and learn. In my
department here, I know that I’ve now got eighty-odd people (it’s grown
this term), each of whom I actually care about and want them to gain
satisfaction from their work position. I will support each one of those
in what they want to do as much as I am able, and I try to give each one
of those that impression. Now obviously, it doesn’t always succeed. You
can’t do that. But I am interested in each as an individual. And if they
go down—if they don’t do as well in something—I have to go into that,
but I will always try and approach it with, “Well, we’re in this
situation now, so let’s get out of it. How do we do it? And what do we
build for the future?” Because I have been there. So I’ll never give up
on anybody. I’ll always try to give them the next step, because I have
been the person at the bottom so much myself.

**Abbate:**

Now, obviously you were able to advance in the department; I guess after
the divorce. How did that happen?

### Working on Advancing Career at Southampton

**Lovegrove:**

Well, when I was at Southampton: from 1987, when the divorce happened, I
then tried to get as much research as I could going.

**Abbate:**

Because that was the way to . . .

**Lovegrove:**

Because that was the way for advancement at Southampton. And I did
advance reasonably quickly, but I got frustrated, because I had this
belief in myself that I could achieve more, and I really wasn’t prepared
to go down the track that Southampton laid out for me. That is to say
that to become a Senior Lecturer, you needed to have a certain number of
kinds of top publications, and you needed to have research groups and so
on; and if you ever wanted to be a Professor, you had to have far, far
more of those. Although I felt that I could achieve that, down that
research route, it was going to be too slow, because I was working from
very much a starting position in 1987\. And there were other
possibilities, which were in the “new universities.”

It got so that by 1991, after four years from being divorced, I had a
reasonably good research record; I was very knowledgeable about courses
and accreditation; and I was feeling frustrated, because I wanted to get
there faster than the people in the department were aware that I wanted
to do\! \laughs.\ And in my view, I wasn’t getting the support I
deserved in the way of equipment. I had asked for a machine—a new
computer—and it was refused; and yet some Teaching Fellow somewhere was
given one, and I hadn’t been given one. I felt as if I was being
overlooked. I felt it was poor management, if you like, in that they
weren’t aware of all of the people, and they weren’t doing appraisals
and so on. But it was also being overlooked. I also wasn’t approaching
things in the right way to make my case well heard. I realize that now,
but I didn’t realize it at the time: that you need to be positively
assertive. Instead of that, I was being reactively negative.

But I was very frustrated, so I decided that I would apply for Heads’
posts in two new universities. Much to my amazement, both universities
were very interested, and I was offered an appointment at one, and the
other one immediately got on the phone and said “No no no, come to us\!”
I’d never realized that I was that attractive to them; it was partly
because of my research and “old university” experience, but it was also
partly because of all the contacts that I had and the things that I was
doing. But I didn’t know that\! I went for the bigger one, because
again, I wasn’t sure of myself, and I thought that by being a Head
amongst other Heads, I could actually learn faster from them about how
to do things, and not quite be so exposed as being a single Head. So I
went for the bigger school, which was at Staffordshire University, as a
Head of Information Systems.

**Abbate:**

Now, pardon my ignorance, but I’m not sure what a Head actually
designates.

**Lovegrove:**

Yes, it’s a good question. Across the country you’ve got varying sizes
of departments: so you might have a Head of Computing, who is in charge
of only twenty, twenty-five, thirty, or even fewer people, and then
you’d have one Head of Department over that number of people.

**Abbate:**

So the Department Chair would be the Head of the Department?

**Lovegrove:**

Possibly, but there might also be other professors.

**Abbate:**

But there’s people below?

**Lovegrove:**

Yes. So you’d have Principal Lecturers, as they call them in the new
universities.

**Abbate:**

And there could be several Heads in the department?

**Lovegrove:**

It’s a good question, because each university’s organized slightly
differently. If you had a department of around twenty or thirty, you’d
have one Head of Computing. You might then have a Head of Engineering;
you might have a Head of Information Systems; a Head of Biological
Sciences, or something; and then you might have a Dean on top of the
lot. In a bigger setup, which there was at Staffordshire, you actually
had a Dean at the Head of the School of Computing; and then you had Head
of Information Systems; Head of Software Engineering; Head of Computer
Science; Head of Mathematics; and Head of another campus. So, those in
some universities might have been Head of subject division status, which
would have been Principal Lecturer status; but at Staffordshire, they
were actually on the management spine and part of the management, so the
two that I applied for were both on the management spine. They were not
Principal Lecturers; it was above that. So I was jumping two points, if
you like: I was missing the Senior Lecturer  Principal Lecturer one and
I was going straight to the next one, which was the Head of a department
level.

**Abbate:**

And what were you Head of?

**Lovegrove:**

Information Systems. And that was at Staffordshire in this bigger setup.
That did enable me to learn a lot from the people around me. I was there
from 1992 until 1999, and I found that I’d learned a lot from the Dean
and the way that he brought people on and encouraged people to learn
about management. But I also learned an awful lot about how not to do
things. So when I left to come here \to University of Northumbria\, I
brought with me an awful lot of experience about not only integrating
your top people, but also about how to integrate into a whole community,
and keep a lot of information flowing, and try to make sure each person
is being valued properly.

### Arriving at Northumbria, Reflections on the University

**Abbate:**

And how did you end up coming here to Northumbria?

**Lovegrove:**

Well, at Staffordshire, the Dean was appointed as a Pro Vice Chancellor
at another university, and the Dean position became vacant. I applied
for that, but I didn’t get it; but I was sufficiently close to getting
it—I was actually found appointable—that it reassured me that I could be
doing better things somewhere else. And since I’m now getting on in
life, I really didn’t want to let that go; I wanted to do something
about it as soon as possible. Northumbria came up very quickly; I was
head-hunted to come here. It was an increase in salary—not a huge
increase, but it was some increase in salary, even though it was
actually moving down from an Associate Dean status into a Head of School
status. But I liked the atmosphere here, and it has a good reputation,
and I wanted a change of scene. So, decided I would go for it, really
because I felt, “Well, I can be my own Head at last; and I’ve got a new
area where I can live and work; it sounds fun. So I’d like to do this.”
And also because I could do it easily, I thought \laughs\, because I’d
learned all this stuff; and I thought I had more than enough experience
to be the Head of a department of around fifty, as it was then, two
years ago.

I came here and I found a department that was full of people with masses
of ideas, but rather suppressed—repressed—having not been in the right
kind of atmosphere before. What it’s been like: it’s like opening lots
and lots of people up to new possibilities, and then after about a year,
having all these bouncing Tiggers who want to do different things—so
excited with all the possibilities\! And then organizing the groups
gradually even more coherently—in my view, anyway, because obviously
it’s being run how I want it. But they are now working with each other
in an unusually successful way. I’ve been teaching them about
overlapping circles and communication, and about men working
side-by-side with men, which doesn’t come naturally to them; so I’ve
been talking to them. Men don’t work very easily in teams. If I have a
team of men and I say, “Person one, you do this; person two do that;
person three do that; person four do that”: they work
brilliantly—independently—and they’ll come back. But if you say,
normally, to a group of men, “I’d like you to work on these ideas; go
and do it”: it doesn’t work. Not in the original group; it does work
now, but it didn’t, because it was alien to them before. They had been
used to defending their own territory and making themselves look better
than the next guy—fight, fight, fight, all the way.

**Abbate:**

Was it different if it was a mixed group, or all women?

**Lovegrove:**

Yes, but we have very few women. We don’t have many women here who have
the ability to synergize groups around them to work together. I don’t
want to knock the women that we have here; they hadn’t been in an
environment where you could do that anyway; but also, of their natures,
when they first came, they were not of that type. They were survivors in
an alien atmosphere, and they had survived by fighting their own corners
hard, and you could see that. They have been the slowest ones to come
around. They’ve found it difficult with me, quite a number of them,
because their old boundaries and their old ways of establishing
themselves were no longer there, and they didn’t know what their new
environment was then. How did they score well in this new environment?
They didn’t know that. I’ve tried talking to them about what the new
scoring, if you like, is: you know, to do with self-progression and
working with other people and so on; and there is beginning to be some
progress now, at the end of two years. We’ve also brought some more
women into the department, so I’m hoping for better things. But that’s
been really disappointing and tough for me. I’ve been very sad about
that.

**Abbate:**

Is it hard to recruit women?

**Lovegrove:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

There’s just not a big pool out there?

**Lovegrove:**

No. Obviously, as you can imagine, on my side, I will choose the best
person for what I want. I’m certainly not anti-women, but neither am I
going to give them a chance above the men that I need, because I just
don’t think like that. It isn’t conscious; I’m just looking for the
kinds of people who will work well here. Sometimes they’re women and
sometimes they’re men. I will try and bring on the women. I will try,
probably a little bit harder, with each of them; but we’ve got some
tough cases here who don’t understand this, and they’re very, very
fearful, and do not believe that I am doing that—which has been hard for
me.

I think it’s unusually bad here. I mean, it was never like that at
Staffordshire. In Information Systems in Staffordshire I had quite a lot
of women. I had only one woman, I think, who reacted in that way in the
whole of Staffordshire University. But I’ve got two or three here who
are finding it hard. I think it’s just chance—just chance and the old
environment, where they’re survivors. But I know we’ll get there in the
end, because they’ll gradually see what’s being done, and they’ll
gradually believe it. But it’s taking a lot longer than I want to, and
that’s very sad.

**Abbate:**

Have you had any problems from men not wanting to have a female Head?

**Lovegrove:**

Much, much less than I imagined. Virtually no problem inside the school.
I’m just trying to think: have I had any problem inside the school? I
don’t think there’s any problems inside the school; I can’t think of
any. \laughs.\ It’s been rather more difficult, I think, at the
equal-Heads level in my faculty—possibly; but it may just be that that’s
associated with my now leading the biggest and most advancing school,
and therefore they feel threatened.

There is a bit of being taken for granted and ignored—this invisibility.

**Abbate:**

At the Head level?

**Lovegrove:**

At the Head and with the Dean. The Dean is a lovely guy, but to begin
with, there was a little bit of invisibility, in that he’d got his big
other powerful Heads, and he expected to kowtow to them—he’s a gentle
guy. He continued to kowtow to them, and couldn’t understand why I kept
popping my head up and saying, “No, no way; you can’t do that\! You’ve
got to give me more resources\!”—which he thought was not the game.
\laughs.\ However, in fairness, what I have had is enormous support
from the level above him, at the Deputy Vice Chancellor level: two men,
both extremely supportive, and not because I’m a woman, just because I’m
running the department well and they’re pleased to see it. So, enormous
support from there.

So in general, this university has given me far more support as a woman
than Staffordshire University did. It was really tough there; it was
very much macho cliques. The Dean tried to get it not to be that way,
but he had a group of people—men—there, who just couldn’t be brought on
board \laughs\, and were so threatened by my new thinking: all this
“empowerment” stuff and bringing on Principal Lecturers, and
suggesting that what they were doing was less than perfect, they just
couldn’t take. And it was less than perfect. The quality measures in the
School of Computing were poor.

### Reflections on Women in Computing

**Abbate:**

Did you ever feel that being a woman prevented you from getting equal
access to promotions or training or other sort of perks?

**Lovegrove:**

At Staffordshire, under the Dean, access to training: No. He was
extremely good. I didn’t feel that at all. As regards promotion within
Staffordshire, and promotion inside Southampton, then in all fairness, I
would say “yes.”

**Abbate:**

Do you still have time to do research?

**Lovegrove:**

Only a little bit. Yes. Not as much as I would want to. I have a
Research Fellow here, who is hoping to get research started with me,
that I’ve appointed.

**Abbate:**

Is that still in operating systems?

**Lovegrove:**

No, it will be more on the object-oriented side, which is where I was
working at Southampton in the end: components and architectures; all of
that advancement.

**Abbate:**

Do you find that women end up in certain specialties of computer
science?

**Lovegrove:**

I think they tend to go more on the soft side and the information
systems side.

**Abbate:**

The “soft side” meaning software?

**Lovegrove:**

Information systems, yes. More people-oriented stuff. If you look at the
number of women who are being recruited in the different areas, then the
harder computer science will attract less women. Software engineering
attracts less women as well. But the software side of things—the HCI,
the multimedia, the information systems, the databases: there tend to be
more women around that.

**Abbate:**

So, that’s more applied?

**Lovegrove:**

Yes. And it’s got people in it.

**Abbate:**

That’s the “soft” aspect of it.

**Lovegrove:**

Yes, that’s right. And of course, my work also has gradually moved. I
did start off at the hard end, with the operating systems, and nearer to
the machinery; but I’m in my element now, and very happy. And you can
see that in the bigger scale, you can see me moving into the people side
of things, the human relationships and how people work together, which
is what I was interested in when I was at school doing languages. So
I’ve moved more into the things I want to be in—that is, more on the
softer side—but upholding all of this subject area, which is one that
I’ve always really enjoyed. So I’ve got the best combination now,
because I’m working with the people, but I’ve got the technical
knowledge and skills as well.

**Abbate:**

So it’s not one or the other; it’s really combining them.

**Lovegrove:**

It’s really combining them, yes.

**Abbate:**

What do you find most satisfying about computing?

**Lovegrove:**

About computing as opposed to the people thing?

**Abbate:**

Well, I mean your work with computers, over time. What would you say
you’ve gotten the most satisfaction from?

**Lovegrove:**

It is with the software; it is with the writing, the programming; and
it’s the way of organizing those programming systems to work well
together, so that you have it logically working as near to perfectly as
you can, but complexity within that. That interested me in the operating
systems; interested me at Cambridge, when they were doing the TITAN
operating system; and interests me now—but now it’s actually not working
with bits of software; it’s working with people who are doing that,
working together\! So it’s to do with small groups of things working
things through: how you get the communications between the groups.

**Abbate:**

Now, obviously the field of computing has changed greatly since you
started. What strikes you the most about the way it’s changed?

**Lovegrove:**

There are two things, I think, that strike you. One is how much it has
mushroomed; it’s just got so huge. The other thing that strikes is how
much the fundamental core of it all is to do with the analysis of what
you need, and then the designing of it, and then the implementation of
it. So that remains: that simple software engineering theme is integral
to the whole thing.

I can also see it from the perspective of having been involved in
designing software that just upheld numerical analysis, and then started
to uphold simple computer systems, and then through to very large
computer systems, and then all of the applications, and the application
areas. The interesting thing then is slightly different from what you’re
asking, really, but it’s perception by the outside world. That is
something that I’ve been doing rather more work on, recently: the image
of computing; how it is perceived by other professions, by other
institutions, by parents, by the students who want to come here to work,
and all of that. Because it has moved; it has moved from being to do
with simple logic and simple programming of that logic to achieve an
application, right through to now, where you’ve got to do the analysis,
and therefore you’ve got to talk to the people to find out what they
need, and then anticipating what they need as well, and all of that, in
this bigger area of computing. So it is no longer a science; neither is
it an engineering; it is a subject in its own right, which has links
with psychology and all sorts of other areas besides maths and
engineering and science.

**Abbate:**

And you think the public perception has changed?

**Lovegrove:**

No, I think the public hasn’t a clue what we do, in general\! They think
we are IT application writers, because that’s all they see, most of
them. A load of parents, and a load of people in the university, and
loads of politicians: all they see are the applications, and they think
we write the applications and that’s all we do. The bigger science
underneath that—which is essential for bigger systems—and the new kinds
of products that come along are unknown to them. So we are that integral
base, but we’re also the applications.

The other interesting thing is the way that people can come into the
profession not trained at all, or half-trained, and still contribute to
this huge computing area; and yet how do you get them eventually to have
the whole education, so that they are well-placed to advance in new
areas? I find that fascinating, and it’s very pertinent to what I do on
the political scene in London, in trying to promote the image of
computing and point out how we could do more if we had more flexible
salary systems.

**Abbate:**

So are you lobbying for change of some kind?

**Lovegrove:**

Yes, but we are not entirely sure at the moment what change we actually
want to bring about. But we feel that there are more possibilities, if
we knew what they were. Of course, when I lobby, I don’t say we don’t
know what they are; but I am aware that we don’t know entirely what they
are, and part of all this is a road on which to discover what they are
as we gather more information and focus our thinking. We’re a very young
profession, really, and we haven’t got a history of thinking about
ourselves and where we are placed and what we should be doing, and how
government can help us or industry can help us. There’s an awful lot of
work to do. I’m finding out also that in the companies—what are they
doing with IT, and where are they placed, and how can we fit with that?

If they are saying publicly that we’re not producing the graduates that
they want, it’s worth looking into that, and finding out of course what
they think they do want—but also going behind that and finding out what
kind of messes they are in, in that they don’t really know what they
want—because we’re getting mixed messages. All that is a fascinating
picture, and that’s what I’m only starting on; but it’s going to be
lovely work in the future, finding out more about that, and all these
questions to be answered. I enjoy that, because I like having a full
perspective on things, where you can bring in experience to see which
ways you should be going. And we haven’t got enough of that. There are a
very few people—I don’t know really whether there’s anybody very
much—who has got that whole big picture; so it’s worth working on.

**Abbate:**

Are you active in any professional societies?

**Lovegrove:**

I have been Chair of the Professors and Heads of Computing for the last
two years. That’s all the Professors and Heads in the academic
departments.

\DISC 2\

**Abbate:**

Do you think the field of computing has become more open to women over
time? More accessible or appealing to women? Or less?

**Lovegrove:**

I think the Internet is actually doing us some good. I suspect that
we’re getting more people in on the Information Systems—the softer
end—than we are on the harder end.

But I’m also quite interested in looking at the biological differences
between the way that men’s brains and women’s brains are organized, and
therefore their aptitudes and enjoyments of particular types of jobs.
Some of that kind of research has shown that there are some women who—I
shall probably not get this right—whose mothers when they were pregnant
were exposed to a particular rush of one hormone more than another, like
testosterone or something, who would therefore tend to produce women who
are more mathematically or scientifically oriented in their thinking: so
they get more pleasure from doing that of activity, and are also better
at it. There’s scientific evidence to show that. I think that my
experience, and the women that I have met, seems to bear out that kind
of a pattern—in which case, it isn’t just the image of computing and
sociological reasons that cause women not to get into the harder end of
computing. Certainly there are huge social factors, which are much, much
bigger than these smaller biological factors, so really I think . . . We
could, of course, increase the number of women coming into all the areas
of computing by having better knowledge out there—in the parents of the
students, and the students themselves, and the professions—and a more
pro-women environment in general; so you’d up it all over—but I don’t
you’d ever get fifty percent on the harder side, the computer science
side. What would be interesting would be to see whether that kind of
theorizing fits with what you’re discovering in some countries, where
students are going into computing in general in fifty-percent numbers.
What would be interesting would be to find out whether they gravitate
towards the more human-oriented end and away from the more scientific
end, and whether that is due to biological things or whether it’s due to
sociological things. I don’t have that answer, but I have the suspicion
that biology is a smaller effect, but the bigger effect is the
sociological effect: the environment.

**Abbate:**

So you think mathematical aptitude is definitely required for going into
computing?

**Lovegrove:**

No. Well, I think—when you say “mathematical,” in the sense of good
organization: I think good organization and a good degree of logic is
needed. But I think that you can have people like that who don’t
actually do well in maths.

**Abbate:**

Well, I’m trying to follow up on what you had said before, that men have
more—it’s mathematics ability that they have? Or logical ability?

**Lovegrove:**

It’s the ability they have to abstract, and to just think about one line
of thinking at one time, as well, which is a more male phenomenon.

**Abbate:**

That’s the trait that is gender-linked and that you think is important
for computing?

**Lovegrove:**

It’s a mixture, isn’t it? It’s a mixture of what they’re interested in,
what they get pleasure from, what fits with the other people that
they’re working with. So it is a very complex picture.

I just suspect that we’ll never reach fifty percent right across the
board. I think we could have the information systems end—the softer
end—where you had more women than men, in the groupings and in the
working; but I suspect that you’ll find that the harder end, the
computer science and the software engineering, that you’ll actually have
always a disparity there—but not as much as it is at the moment. I mean,
at the moment, in the universities it’s something like ten percent\!

**Abbate:**

\Ten percent\ women in the harder end?

**Lovegrove:**

Yes. It’s really low\!

**Abbate:**

Now, is that a status distinction, to call one side “harder” and the
other “softer”? Is there more respect for the “harder” side?

**Lovegrove:**

Well, I don’t know where that terminology has come from, but “soft” has
been used in respect of human things, and “harder” has been in respect
of engineering things. That’s just . . . I mean, it could be both,
couldn’t it? Humans are soft, machines are hard; mathematics is hard for
a lot of people, writing essays is soft and therefore easier. You know,
there’s a sort of mixture between these two all the way along. Writing
essays is said to be easier—but if you’re writing the essays, you know
it’s not. But the “hard”-oriented people think that writing essays is
easy. The people who are mathematically oriented feel that they could
score a hundred percent on every bit along the scale, and that’s to do
with their ability to think mathematically; they don’t appreciate that
writing an essay is a very hard thing to do, and that you score points,
but differently.

**Abbate:**

I’m just wondering if there’s more—because it is a slippery
distinction—if there’s a sense that there’s more status attached to
\the hard end\.

**Lovegrove:**

I think there’s always been more status attached to mathematical things.
Have you not noticed that? You know, going back: everybody has thought a
mathematician was a slightly weird kind of person, but definitely to be
respected, somewhat like a doctor or a lawyer.

**Abbate:**

There are quite a few women in mathematics . . .

**Lovegrove:**

Yes, there are. Yes: thirty, thirty-five percent.

**Abbate:**

. . . which is one of the puzzles. I mean, there are so many in math,
\but not many in computer science\.

**Lovegrove:**

But you are slightly odd as a woman, being a mathematician. Society
regards you as being slightly unusual, if you are a good mathematician.
If you are a Cambridge mathematician, then you’re even weirder\! \both
laugh.\ If you are a Cambridge mathematician who plays hockey, then you
are definitely beyond the pale\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

You wouldn’t be speaking from personal experience? \both laugh.\

**Lovegrove:**

There is an association with that, on the female side; I think there is
always that. There is that judgment from the outside: if you are a woman
doing an unusually more male job (in their view), then you are slightly
weird. Probably with a load of respect, but also, “Keep your distance. I
don’t think I quite want to be associated with you.” \laughs.\

I don’t think computing has quite got that image, though, now. I think
that, yes, people think, “They’re different,” but there is also a
knowledge of it, through the Internet and everything; I think the image
of computing in people’s view is beginning to change a bit, and that’s
for better. So therefore I think we’ll see more women coming in,
gradually.

**Abbate:**

Do you think the students are more business-oriented since the Internet
boom?

**Lovegrove:**

I think students have always been more business-oriented; always. So I
don’t think that has changed. I think that the Internet has caused more
people to be interested in computing, perhaps more than business. So in
a way, I think the Internet has helped more computing than business.

**Abbate:**

But I mean, they don’t come in thinking, “Well, I’ll be a millionaire if
I learn computing”?

**Lovegrove:**

Well, I think there is another factor there. You know, fifteen years
ago, twenty years ago, the status of being a good electronic engineer,
or doing that at university, was really very high, and they were getting
masses of students wanting to go into that. That has now slumped right
back, and the status of being a computing person is beginning to go up.
The status of being in business has always been very good. When
engineering started to drop, business went up a lot and computing didn’t
go up as much; and that was because people are far more materially
oriented and their decisions are based on how big a salary you could
get.

I think that that has steadied out, but remained fairly high, but
there’s now, in society generally, a little bit more of the human
element coming back in again, so business has dropped slightly and
computing is increasing. I don’t think it’ll increase long term; I think
it’s just a temporary thing. I think it’ll go back again—people thinking
they can make careers and get a lot of money.

**Abbate:**

Thinking back to what you’ve told me, it seems like there have been
several people who were important in encouraging you at various points.
Are there any other people that you’ve considered either role models to
emulate or mentors who encouraged you? How important was that?

**Lovegrove:**

Yes, I think all the way along the line you’re looking for good role
models. There haven’t been many women amongst them; they have been
mainly men: well-balanced men who have seen a wider perspective and been
encouraging. I’m sorry to say this, but I don’t think there are many
well-balanced women at the top in professions—in computing—that I come
across.

**Abbate:**

“Well-balanced” in terms of work and other aspects of life?

**Lovegrove:**

Yes. Same as I would find in some men. You don’t find it in all men, but
you do find some men. I think there are fewer women of that type that
have that balance—that I’ve come across, anyway.

**Abbate:**

Any idea why?

**Lovegrove:**

No, I haven’t really thought about that very much. The ones at the top
always seem to be intensely busy and never have time, whereas I’ve found
some men at the top who have taken time, who have helped. You come
across some women of the Queen Bee variety, who seemingly don’t want to
know about younger women underneath them, but it could be just that
they’re very, very busy. I don’t know.

Going on another theme (and I don’t know whether this has anything to do
with it or not): women in our profession who want to succeed have
actually got to be quite focused and quite determined to succeed in a
slightly alien atmosphere. They normally have got alien atmospheres
around them, and that produces a breed of women who are more focused;
they work harder than the men around them—and they’re the ones you see.
The ones who don’t make it, who are probably these more well-rounded
women, have been lost—some of them—along their way there. And so what
you get are the tougher groups, and they therefore are not perhaps quite
as good at bringing other women on—just by definition, because they’re
more focused about how they get further up.

**Abbate:**

Or they might not make good role models, if you don’t want a one-sided
life.

**Lovegrove:**

Yes.

Also, I’m not quite sure whether I am typical. You see, I had this
unusual upbringing, in that I was very interested in people and
languages and things, and kind of got into the computing by a side
route. Therefore, by nature, I’m very interested in the human and the
learning and the soft development, because it’s helped me. I’m very
interested in that, and therefore I would want to bring on women who I
see coming up to me for any kind of help. The average woman probably
doesn’t have that kind of history, and has been perhaps more
computer-oriented than I am. Maybe I am a little bit unusual. I don’t
mean that I’m unique, because I’m sure there are lots of women who have
these different abilities; but I think it’s perhaps a little bit
unusual. And I have this tenaciousness to hang on despite all, and that
has given me a much greater appreciation and acknowledgment of what
happened to me, and therefore I feel some kind of obligation to wish to
help people who are developing themselves; whereas women who are more
focused still on advancing themselves still seem to be looking up:
“Where am I going on the next step, and the next step?” Or maybe those
are just the women that I come across, and I don’t actually come across
the other ones who are more settled. There aren’t all that many Heads
and Professors—female—in computing; the proportion is relatively small.
In our group of Professors and Heads of Computing, I don’t know what the
proportion is, but I would imagine it’s around ten percent; and in our
true Professors, it’ll be smaller than that, probably around seven
percent. So you haven’t got a great many of them to actually compare
yourself with. Very few of those have taken nine years out or so, having
children; they’ve normally stayed in their careers. So it’s very hard; I
can find one or two who’ve had similar histories to me, but not many. So
I don’t really know how to judge these other women.

### Advice for Women in Computing

**Abbate:**

Do you have any advice for young women who are thinking of going into
computing?

**Lovegrove:**

Yes, I think it’s an excellent career, because you’ve got a whole range
of possibilities; and you must find your own niche, your own level,
where you think, “This is my home. I’m comfortable here. This is where I
want to work.” Wherever it is, from the very much more technical side
right down to the more dealing-with-humans side. And it’s tremendous
because there are always new opportunities. If you’ve had a downer in
your career, for any reason—personal or otherwise—then in computing
there always new opportunities, and your past education is there to prop
you up, so that you can go on ahead. So you can step out; you can step
back; it will be tough for a while, but there will be more
opportunities, because they’re always expanding. If you are emotionally
stable, mature, able to carry things, have good, normal people skills
and intelligence and an interest in your subject, there’s always more
possibilities for the future. It’s a tremendous area for development,
and it keeps you intellectually stimulated.

So: find the position where you want to be, where it is your home; where
you’re most comfortable and you can work in. I say to my guys here,
“What fires you up? Have you gotten into the place that you get fired
up in?” And then, just never think that it isn’t possible. Step back,
look at it again, and find a new position.

And hopefully of course, they’ll all have a manager who’ll actually help
them achieve that\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Well, great\! Thank you very much\!

\

* At the time of this interview, Gillian Lovegrove was Head of the
  School of Computing and Mathematics; in 2002 she became Dean of the
  School of Informatics.

Retrieved from
"<http:ethw.orgindex.php?title=Oral-History:Gillian_Lovegrove&oldid=108425>"

Category(Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* Computing and
  electronics(Category:Computing_and_electronics "Category:Computing and electronics")

## Contents

* 1 About Gillian Lovegrove(#About_Gillian_Lovegrove)
* 2 About the Interview(#About_the_Interview)
* 3 Copyright Statement(#Copyright_Statement)
* 4 Interview(#Interview)
  * 4\.1 Background and Education(#Background_and_Education)
  * 4\.2 Learning at Cambridge Maths Lab and Working on
    EDSAC(#Learning_at_Cambridge_Maths_Lab_and_Working_on_EDSAC)
  * 4\.3 Learning and Teaching at
    Southampton(#Learning_and_Teaching_at_Southampton)
  * 4\.4 Reflecting on Personal Life(#Reflecting_on_Personal_Life)
  * 4\.5 Working on Advancing Career at
    Southampton(#Working_on_Advancing_Career_at_Southampton)
  * 4\.6 Arriving at Northumbria, Reflections on the
    University(#Arriving_at_Northumbria.2C_Reflections_on_the_University)
  * 4\.7 Reflections on Women in
    Computing(#Reflections_on_Women_in_Computing)
  * 4\.8 Advice for Women in Computing(#Advice_for_Women_in_Computing)

!Powered by
MediaWiki(resourcesassetspoweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)(www.mediawiki.org)
!Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki(extensionsSemanticMediaWikiincludes..resourcesimagessmw_button.png)(https:www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 21 November 2014, at 10:44\.

* This page has been accessed 1,993 times.

* About ETHW(ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* Policies and disclaimers(ETHW:Policies "ETHW:Policies")

