Toggle navigation   

[ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki](/Main_Page)

* [** Go ****]()
  * [Browse by Subject](/ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * [Encyclopedia](/Encyclopedia)
  
  * [Oral Histories](/Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * [First Hand Histories](/First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * [Landmarks/Milestones](/Landmarks)
  
  * [Archives](/Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * [Education](/ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * [Random page](/Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * [Help](/Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * [Contact us](/Special:Contact)
  
  * 
  * [Recent changes](/Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * [New pages](/Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* [** Actions ****]()
  * [View
    source](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Dame_Stephanie_\(Steve\)_Shirley&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]")
  
  * [History](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Dame_Stephanie_\(Steve\)_Shirley&action=history "Past revisions of this page [h]")
  
  * 
  * [Oral-History](/Oral-History:Dame_Stephanie_\(Steve\)_Shirley)
  
  * [Discussion](/index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Dame_Stephanie_\(Steve\)_Shirley&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page [t]")
  
  * 
* [** Tools ****]()
  * [What links
    here](/Special:WhatLinksHere/Oral-History:Dame_Stephanie_\(Steve\)_Shirley "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]")
  
  * [Related
    changes](/Special:RecentChangesLinked/Oral-History:Dame_Stephanie_\(Steve\)_Shirley "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]")
  
  * [Special
    pages](/Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages [q]")
  
  * [Printable
    version](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Dame_Stephanie_\(Steve\)_Shirley&printable=yes "Printable version of this page [p]")
  
  * [Permanent
    link](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Dame_Stephanie_\(Steve\)_Shirley&oldid=108313 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * [Page
    information](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Dame_Stephanie_\(Steve\)_Shirley&action=info)
  
  * [Browse
    properties](/Special:Browse/Oral-2DHistory:Dame_Stephanie_\(Steve\)_Shirley)
* [** Account ****](# "Account")
  * [Log
    in](/index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3ADame+Stephanie+%28Steve%29+Shirley)
  
  * 
  * [Request account](/Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Dame Stephanie (Steve) Shirley

## About Dame Stephanie (Steve) Shirley

Dame Stephanie (Steve) Shirley is a highly successful entrepreneur
turned ardent philanthropist. In 1962, she founded the software company
originally named Freelance Programmers Ltd. (later named renamed Xansa,
and then acquired by Steria). It developed a unique business model as it
outsourced all its software development to women software developers who
worked from home. This “cottage industry” model originally targeted
women with dependents. Throughout her entrepreneurial career, she
pioneered employment opportunities for female programmers and allowed
them to continue their education and professional development.

Since her retirement, she has gained additional renown for her
philanthropic efforts through the Shirley Foundation. The foundation has
given over £50 million to various charities, targeting those that
support autistic people and emerging technology fields. For instance, it
was the major funder of the Oxford Internet Institute, which is part of
Oxford University.

Shirley was one of the founders of British Computer Society.
Additionally, she was appointed Officer of the Order of the British
Empire (OBE) and promoted to Dame Commander in 2000\. From May 2009 to
May 2010, she served as the UK’s Ambassador for Philanthropy.

In this interview Shirley focuses primarily on her career. She talks
about her initial training in computers, the formation of her software
development company and some of the challenges she faced throughout her
career. This interview has a strong gender component as she discusses
the discrimination she endured and why she initially only hired women
with dependents.

For a longer and more comprehensive oral history done by Stephanie
Shirley, please see the one conducted by the [British
Library](http://sounds.bl.uk/Oral-history/Eminent-scientists/021M-C1379X0028XX-0001V0).

## About the Interview

STEPHANIE SHIRLEY: An interview conducted by Janet Abbate for the IEEE
History Center, April 20, 2001

Interview \#627 for the IEEE History, The Institute of Electrical and
Electronic Engineers, Inc.

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
the IEEE History Center Oral History Program, IEEE History Center at
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ
07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include identification of
the specific passages to be quoted, anticipated use of the passages, and
identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Stephanie Shirley: an oral history conducted in 2001 by Janet Abbate,
IEEE History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

## Interview

INTERVIEWEE: Dame Stephanie Shirley\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: April 20th, 2001\
PLACE: Stephanie Shirley’s Study in Henley-on-Thames

### Kindertransport and Childhood in England

**Abbate:**

It’s April 20th, 2001\. I’m speaking with Dame Stephanie Shirley.

To start at the beginning, when were you born and where did you grow up?

**Shirley:**

I was born in 1933, the child of a German jurist and an Austrian—well,
my mother didn’t work at all. This was really at the time of horrendous
discrimination \[against Jews\] in Germany. That is relevant, I think,
to my serial entrepreneurism, because it has given me a very strong
desire to be accepted, to survive, to make my survival worthwhile.
People are surprised that sixty years later, that need to justify my
existence remains with me. Because I still work pretty well
full-time—largely unpaid now, because it’s for philanthropic
endeavors. That all really stems from that bad start.

I came on what’s called a Kindertransport, as did ten thousand other
children—unaccompanied children—to England. I came with my older sister,
and we were fostered by a childless couple in the Midlands of England.
To everyone’s surprise—probably their own—their hearts were touched by
little pictures in the paper saying, “Homes wanted for two
well-brought-up children.” My parents and I were reunited, but sadly, I
never really bonded with them again, and I’m really the child of my
foster parents.

My sister sublimated her childhood trauma—because they were very
difficult times—by working always with children. She worked with
adoptions and fostering, and eventually went to Australia. I went to her
funeral some years ago, and, probably more than I had realized, she had
done a lot for the concept of fostering: because I think we understand
what loss and bereavement is, in that sense. Today, in some of the
things that I do (not computer things), I am doing very similarly, in
that I work with a school for profoundly learning-disabled children, who
don’t communicate, and whose parents are themselves going through trauma
in letting their children go. Somehow I think I have some understanding
of that, because of those early traumas. So I think it’s part of my
developmental history.

**Abbate:**

How old were you when you came to England?

**Shirley:**

I was five. So I was, I suppose, one of the youngest children that can
remember anything at all about the journey. There were some babies,
babes in arms, who were escorted by teenage children, some of whom were
themselves coming to England to stay. Others had done a deal with the
Nazis, that they would bring the children over and then return to
Germany—to almost certain death. I always think those young girls were
inordinately brave.

**Abbate:**

Was your sister your only other sibling?

**Shirley:**

Yes, yes, there were just the two of us. My father later remarried, and
so I have a half-sister, also in Australia, but I don’t have any family
in this country.

**Abbate:**

What did your foster parents do for a living?

**Shirley:**

Uncle had started as an apprentice in a small light-to-heavy engineering
company, and he finished up as managing director. And I guess he did act
as a bit of a role model in some ways, certainly as regards my values,
which come from him. Very upright, very full of Victorian sayings and
mottoes—”If a job’s worth doing at all, it’s worth doing well”—and he
really gave me a very good basis on which to ground any philosophy or
spirituality. But he didn’t bring work home at all, and I’m not sure
whether he actually inspired me in business in any sense. It was years
after I’d been in business that I thought, “Of course, Uncle’s in
business as well.” We call them Uncle and Auntie, as most adoptive and
foster children do.

Auntie had never worked, and was somewhat fragile, and a difficult lady.
Tremendous sense of humor, which I think over time I’ve picked up, and
that’s nice. She almost had a sort of feyness about her. But it was she
who suddenly decided to foster two Jewish children—you know, coming from
a sort of bigoted and conventional upbringing, it was quite a big thing
for them to do. Uncle was absolutely marvelous with children, he really
was. Auntie wasn’t, because she was so egocentric. But we had a lovely
time.

**Abbate:**

Where was that again?

**Shirley:**

In the Midlands of England, just outside—well, well outside Birmingham,
but Uncle worked in Birmingham. It seemed very countrified, a little red
brick detached house facing onto fields and woods. We did have a lot of
air-raids during the war, because the bombers were going in for
Birmingham. We were not bombed, luckily, but we went down into an
underground air raid shelter most nights. But I felt very secure and
safe there. He only died a few years ago; I miss him terribly. Auntie
died many years ago.

### Education

**Abbate:**

What type of schools did you go to?

**Shirley:**

Well, Auntie and Uncle first of all sent me to the village school. Of
course, I didn’t speak a word of English when I arrived—we arrived
second of July, and by September, when school started, we were speaking
enough English to go to school. I started to pick up the most horrendous
Birmingham accent\! Nowadays, we welcome that sort of diversity; but
Auntie and Uncle were very snobbish, and the thought that a child of
theirs should start to speak with such an accent was horrendous\! They
removed me after one term and sent me to a small private school, which
was a Roman Catholic convent. Nuns in those days wore habits. And there
again, they didn’t push the religion on me; Auntie and Uncle were
nominally Church of England. They taught me not only a good grounding
for grammar school, but also gave very good values, as I look back on
it. It was a good grounding.

They were not professional teachers, but they had enough professionalism
to eventually realize that I had a gift in mathematics, and to go to
Auntie and Uncle and say, “This child is gifted; we can’t teach her. She
needs to go elsewhere.” And so I sat for, and got, a scholarship—because
in those days you had to pay to go to a grammar school—and went to
grammar schools for the rest of my education. First in Lichfield, which
was with Auntie and Uncle, and then my mother found somewhere where I
could stay, and I went to Oswestry, on the border of Wales, where,
again, I spent five years or something like that.

I was very obviously a high performer, a high achiever, and very much a
driven child. But also, the family, such as it was, was living on
charity funds, and being short of money for so long really got to me.
And although I did sit one exam—well, we hadn’t even got enough money to
pay for sitting examinations (you had to pay to sit for them), so I just
sat in on a joint one, and didn’t do well—I was quite happy to leave
school at eighteen and start working, which I did. I took my honors
maths degree at evening classes in London, and although it was pretty
tough, it did mean that at twenty-three I had my honors degree and, at
the same time, five years’ work experience. That’s somehow been the
pattern of my life: in that, if you don’t have holidays, if you do work
weekends, if you do work a very long day, and you have got five years’
experience when you’re twenty-three, you quickly overtake people who are
intellectually much more capable, but just haven’t got the drive and the
energy and motivation. So I think whatever I have achieved—and I am a
totally self-made woman—really came simply by energy and perseverance.

I was also at the beginning of the industry of the twentieth century,
really. There I was, pretty well at the beginning. I’m classed as a
“late pioneer,” so that’s just at the end of the actual pioneering
stage. Some of my software is in the Science Museum. It was a matter of
timing, really; but a lot of business, of course, is timing. There are
plenty of people who miss the opportunities that are there—and there are
many opportunities. I grabbed just one.

**Abbate:**

Had your foster parents impressed on you the necessity of having a
career and supporting yourself, or was that simply obvious in the
situation?

**Shirley:**

They were fairly gender-free. They were not ambitious or academic
themselves. Uncle certainly respected wealth; it had given him comfort
and security. Certainly the need to support myself and get on my feet,
that’s true of most first-generation immigrants: you’ve just got to get
going.

There are some refugees who remain refugees, who remain embittered about
what’s happened to them; never on their feet, always mourning what
they’ve lost. After the war, Germany did something which I think is
unusual in history, in that it tried to make reparation to Jewish people
who had suffered. There was some social pressure, and a lot of
discussion among Jewish people (which I was not really part of, because
I hadn’t had any religion, and neither did my family have any) of the
sort of monstrous, “So much \[compensation\] for a parent, so much for a
brother . . .” But we had merely lost education and lost material
things; our parents had survived. We actually started this reparation
process, but eventually I said, “This is ridiculous. I feel fine. I
don’t need this, and I don’t want the hassle of going over and over
and over again the trauma of our childhood.” And after much
psychological counseling—I had six years of analysis—I just don’t think
it’s . . . I occasionally work now with refugees, but it’s always on the
basis of how to get people jobs, things like that. It’s not really a
movement that I feel I can give very much to—simply because I no longer
feel a refugee.

### First Employment

**Abbate:**

So how did you end up in London?

**Shirley:**

London was where everybody went to get a job.

**Abbate:**

And what was your first job?

**Shirley:**

I applied for two jobs: one at the GEC (General Electric Company), a big
firm—it’s called something different now—and the other at the Post
Office Research Station at Dollis Hill, which is a good, well-known
research establishment, and was near to where we had our home. It was
the Post Office who not only offered the job to an eighteen-year-old,
but also offered me training opportunities, and I wanted those. So that
was the reason for taking that one; and I was there for eight years. I
met my husband there. Again, I had pretty good training.

My first boss was a real bully, and . . .

**Abbate:**

What were they training you to do?

**Shirley:**

\[I think\] it was called a Maths Laboratory. I was a little glorified
mathematical clerk, punching desk calculator comptometers. Doing graphs
of things; occasionally we would take a measurement, but it was usually
purely numerical. I learned about algebras, correlations, statistics. I
think I studied a bit in statistics, because I was still studying \[for
my honors maths degree\]. I learned to project-manage a task. I did my
first supervision; I had somebody actually reporting to me by the time I
was twenty-six. And basically, I suppose, background training for a
mathematician—pure mathematician. I loved mathematics. I was going to be
the world’s greatest mathematician; it was I who was going to solve
Fermat’s Last Theorem; this was my love, and I still get pleasure from
it. It soon became obvious, though, that I did not have the intellect to
actually contribute to the mathematics that I loved so much. This didn’t
matter, in actuality, because suddenly computers came on the scene—one
was looking at the very early computers in the ‘50s—and by the nature of
what I was doing, immediately, just as I’d always known I wanted to be a
mathematician, I immediately knew that that’s what I wanted to do\! I
was just overwhelmed, absolutely.

**Abbate:**

How did you first encounter computers?

**Shirley:**

A friend of mine with whom I was studying at evening classes was working
on an early computer, an Elliott 401, I think it was called. And I took
my annual holiday and spent the time hanging around his job, sweeping up
the little chads that fell on the floor, making myself generally useful
so they didn’t throw me out\! Oddly enough, that was at GEC \[where I
had applied for a job earlier\]. It was just what I wanted to do, so I
went back to my employer and asked to move into the computing side. We
didn’t even have the names then; we would solemnly discuss how to spell
“programme”: with a single or a double “m”?

I really got a bit of a brush-off. I hadn’t gotten my maths degree at
that time, and you needed proper mathematics to work on computers in
those days. So I sort of fringed on it for some time. Then eventually,
of course, I got my degree, applied for promotion to my boss—said, “I
want to go on for the next grade”—and it caused quite a lot of fuss,
because they’d never had a woman at the grade that I was applying for.
This is part of the British scientific civil service, and the way in
which the civil service make appointments is through an interview panel
of five people, not including your direct report. Rumors got around to
me that my panel kept resigning, the ones that were going to interview
me; for some of them had got enough integrity to admit, “I would never
appoint a woman. There’s no point in me sitting on this panel. I won’t
appoint any woman.” And I mention this because this is from whence
computing women come. It was an environment in which it was very
discriminated. Even in an employment opportunity where people were paid
fixed salaries by age or grade—if you were such-and-such a grade, and
such an age—then there was another salary pattern for women. They were
different\!

**Abbate:**

Even in the civil service?

**Shirley:**

Yes, even in the civil service. Because it was very rigid there. They
did employ women, but . . . . It was a very different sort of life.

**Abbate:**

This was the late ‘50s, by this time?

**Shirley:**

Mid-fifties, really.

I think my first boss acted as a role model to me later—as the sort of
boss I didn’t want to be, because he was very, very didactic: “Do this;
do that.” My management style was much more collegial, and much more—it
has often been described as “feminine,” but I don’t really think it is;
it’s just more me, and I happen to be a woman.

But certainly those first years at work were quite important in the
sense that I got very good training and enjoyed work. Work to me is not
just something I do when I’d rather be doing something else; I really
enjoyed work, still do, probably always will. I’m a classic
intellectual: I like to learn; I like to do new things; and for me to
start off in a research station, however lowly—I was always doing
something new\! You were never repeating yourself. And when I have to
repeat myself—which, obviously, in management you frequently are . . .
Every quarter, you do the same thing; every year, you have different
situations, but you’re still with the same title, you’re effectively
doing the same job. I’m the sort of person that the first time they do
something, I might be even brilliant; the second time I do it I’m barely
competent; and the third time I do it, I’m just bored, and then I really
hardly perform at all. Whereas the professional manager will improve all
the time, I’m very much better doing fresh things all the time, so I’m
at my peak. I’m a starter of things, I’m a serial entrepreneur. Yet I
have managed a large organization. I didn’t enjoy it, but did it
dutifully and made sure I was trained and competent to do it. I put the
time in, but didn’t have the flair for doing it—no interest in it. I
respect professional management very much, but it’s not something I like
to do. Although I headed my company for twenty-five years, I should have
got out earlier; and now I make sure when I set something up that two,
three, four years later I can back off and find somebody else to take it
forward. They’re always much better at it than I am\! So I’m much
respected not only for my early computing work, which is actually
trivial, but for my managerial and entrepreneurial drive, and for the
way in which I’ve managed succession. I actually drove a whole lot of
people—predominantly women—and they are all doing great things, which is
really marvelous.

### Early Career with Computers

**Abbate:**

Did you leave the Post Office when they \[refused to promote you\]?

**Shirley:**

Yes. Well, I met my dear husband at the Post Office Research Station.
Derek was a theoretical physicist; the Research Station had about 2000
people on site, with 200 graduates. Very quiet, very shy; so we’re very
complementary in style, which has held us together through thick and
thin. And I just didn’t want to go on working at the same place \[as my
husband-to-be\]. There were another couple of dual-career people at the
Research Station, and I’d seen the way in which, if they lunched
together, people said, “Oh look, they’re lunching together.” If they
didn’t lunch together, they’d say, “I wonder why they’re not lunching
together?” And I just thought, “No\!” and I took myself off. There was a
financial incentive as well, in that, as a historic remnant of when
women were not allowed to continue as civil servants when married, a
concession allowed you to take out your pension payments on marriage. I
thought, “Aha\!” So I resigned, and we got married on the strength of
that payment.

By that time, I had come to terms with my traumatic childhood, but I had
been very unsettled in England. (My sister never settled; I think she
always felt like a refugee, but that’s another story.) I actually went
to Vienna, from whence we came, to lay a few ghosts. Really, in my
mind—if they played Viennese music, I would be in floods of tears; I
felt I was in the wrong place, I hadn’t got any roots—all those sorts of
things immigrants go through. So I went back to Vienna—a big journey in
those days, and I hadn’t got much money, and I hadn’t got a bed.
Suddenly, I realized when I got there: absolutely nothing’s for me
there. And I phoned Derek from Vienna—again, phone calls were very
difficult in those days—and said, “I’m coming back. Let’s get married on
my return.” So there was some need to really decide that this was my
place. Quite ridiculous; but you get like that.

I left the Post Office Research Station on marriage, and my husband
continued to work there, and I applied for a job with a computer
company. Suddenly, I was no longer a general mathematician. I’d worked
on quite a few computers by that time: using computers to solve
problems, but secondly, designing computers: special purpose computers.
One was concerned with the first electronic telephone exchange, Highgate
Wood in north London; another was a special-purpose computer called
ERNIE— Electronic Random Number Indicator Equipment—which is a
lottery-type thing that we had here very early. I did some of the
checking software with a more senior colleague; I was very much the
junior person on the team.

**Abbate:**

This was the operating system software? Which part were you doing?

**Shirley:**

It was the checking of the hardware. I did that quite a bit. Hardware
would be designed, and I was writing software to check the hardware. It
wasn’t until I left to join ICL that I did anything that you would now
call an operating system.

So I’d done majorish sort of computer projects by that time, and I had
become a founding member of the British Computer Society \[in 1957\]. It
had an age qualification, so I actually had to join as a student,
because I was underage\! It makes one think, “What is one doing with
some of these regulatory things?”—in which I became much involved,
later. Age is certainly not one of the criteria under which we should
evaluate people.

**Abbate:**

What was the purpose of the BCS at that point?

**Shirley:**

Oh, as it was for many years: setting the standards. The professional
qualifications came slightly later, but the concept of qualifications
was always there, right at the beginning. Running conferences: I
attended one lecture run by the British Computer Society every month,
and I was pretty loyal to these lectures. They were on computing in
libraries, computing for submarines, computing for . . . you know, an
array of people talking about things. Academics, in the main. Yes, it
was very academically oriented for many years.

I became its president in 1989-90: the first woman president—only woman
president, as always\! What I did in the time that I was working towards
that senior position within the professional body—and I’ve very proud to
have headed it—was help it towards chartered status. This is a seal of
quality on the professional approach.

**Abbate:**

So when the organization got chartered status, then they were able to
designate people as Chartered Engineers?

**Shirley:**

That came later, via the Engineering Council.

So I was very much involved during that period. And then when I was
president, I think my contribution was largely to start to move it into
a much more marketing stance—because it was all full of academics. Oh,
it was dreadful\! \[laughter.\] So I was a very active president, and in
retrospect people realized that that was a cusp, that it needed some
sort of commercial drive to it.

But \[to resume\]: I left the Post Office Research Station on marriage
and joined ICL for a very important eighteen months in my career. It was
my first proper management job; I did have a small team in software. I
was twenty-six at that time. I had quite a lot of responsibility, again
for testing out the ICT 1301\. ICL was then called English Electric ICT,
and it was a subsidiary, jointly owned by GEC (it’s amazing how the same
names come up over and over again). The subsidiary was called Computer
Developments Limited; it was CDL, in Kenton, North London. We had a very
bright group of people there, about thirty of us. There were all sorts
of disciplines, and I was one of their better software people. But there
were hardware people, and what we did was, we commissioned the first ICT
1301, with unbuffered peripherals. It was being commissioned in GEC
Coventry, and I did some really very good work there—pretty well on my
own, actually—devising tests for different things; working under quite a
lot of pressure, very often working through the night.

People weren’t quite happy about women doing this. When you are
committed to the full development of women in public life, then you have
to stop and think, “Now hold on, we’ve actually got some legislation
that stops women and children going down mines, because we say that that
is a much too perilous thing for women and children to be doing—but that
same legislation stops women working at night.” Et cetera, et cetera. So
I was beginning to be interested in women’s issues there. They had been
there before, I remember now, because when \[the Post Office\] had these
great comptometer things, you had to carry them around: they were heavy,
and I was a “pretty young thing,” and so people would offer to carry it
for me. I remember saying, “No, I will carry mine. I believe in equal
pay; I will carry my own machine.” I was beginning to get quite
assertive fairly early on.

But it was at that CDL, where I was doing good work, and I was very
happy, \[that I encountered gender issues\]. I was having some
miscarriages, and women’s careers were very often linked with our
child-bearing, and I’d been told to take it a bit easier—and then I hit
what we now call the “glass ceiling.” I was making suggestions at
management meetings and so on—marketing-oriented suggestions—and was
told explicitly, “Keep quiet. It has nothing to do with you. You’re
technical.” And the occasion when that particular statement was made to
me was so overt that I went home, thought about it very carefully, came
back, and resigned the next day. I saw, even in this excellent company,
very good, I was not going to get anywhere, if there were such blocks to
progress. And, like many women, I set up my own company in order to
circumvent the gender issues that were becoming apparent in my career.

**Abbate:**

Were they saying that you couldn’t have moved into marketing?

**Shirley:**

They were, yes.

**Abbate:**

That was a male domain at ICL?

**Shirley:**

You know, it was management. And later on I’ll talk about Hilary
Cropper—remind me about that, because again, she had much the same
thing in a different and more senior way. No, most men really boggle,
even today, in England; the position of women is not the same as in the
States. We only had one female chief executive of a FTSE 100 company,
and she’s an American. We did a panel recently, in Frankfurt, on women
in financial services; I think there were seven of us, and all of us
have had exposure in America, and what came out of the discussion was
that the can-do approach, and the openness (at least to women, though
not yet to blacks), have really made quite a difference to our careers.
It was quite clear. Or it may be just a fluke, but all of us spoke about
finding it freer in the States. It’s very different here.

**Abbate:**

Had you gone to the States at that point?

**Shirley:**

No, no.

### Switching to the ICL

**Abbate:**

Was it hard to get the job at ICL?

**Shirley:**

No. And for the first time I was well paid—I couldn’t believe that I
could be paid so much for doing something that I enjoyed\! The civil
service didn’t pay me well, and so I quadrupled my pay at ICL, though
that was not the motivation.

The decision to go into business on my own account was, I might say,
unnatural for me. I’d come from a culture of public service: my sister
was a social worker, my mother was a teacher, my father was a judge.
That’s what you do; you don’t go into business. And my interest in
business was social. I had this idea, first, that software was much more
important than anybody else seemed to realize, much more important than
hardware—much more interesting, as well; maybe it was the interest
rather than the importance. And second, that there were other women
\[like me\]; I was not alone in wanting to work in a different way.
Women were coming out of the universities with decent maths degrees, as
were required for software, for the first time looking around for jobs
to do. Either you were an academic, or you used your maths degree to go
into this new computing field.

But anyone that claims, “We knew how wonderful the industry was going to
be,” I think they’re telling a great big fib. It was just so exciting,
we didn’t look further than the current project. “How were we going to
do this? And how were we going to do that?” It was a great time, and
very creative. When you’re young, everything you do is new, and so it
wasn’t until afterwards that I realized that some of the things that we
were doing were not just new to me, but were new, full stop. And you
have to have some perspective to look back on it and say, “I found it
difficult, but of course, I was only twenty-six. Of course I was going
to find it difficult then, because I didn’t know very much.” But I’ve
tried, later on, to make a virtue out of lack of knowledge, because then
you can be creative, and you’re not channeled by some sort of training:
“This is the way to do it,” or “That’s the way to do it.”

### Starting her own Company

The company that I founded \[Freelance Programmers Ltd, 1962\] was
certainly very different. It was motivated by social needs for me, and
women like me, to be able to work in a much more flexible way, without
that glass ceiling or people saying, “You shouldn’t be doing this, you
shouldn’t be doing that.” It was certainly not intended, was not
targeted, to make serious money. My husband had a modest but perfectly
adequate job, and a safe job also, in civil service. I even investigated
running it as a charity. I didn’t know—women had very little commercial
training in those days, and I hadn’t a clue what a business was, or how
it might be, and so I literally aimed to break even. I decided not to
make it into a charity—much too cumbersome—but for five pounds, or less
than that, you could register a business name and get going.

So we started very small, the original freelancer. We called it
“Freelance Programmers,” so I must have had—well, I did have some idea
of making it grow; but it was incredibly amateur. For many years I
didn’t talk about this, because one was then trying to project a much
more businesslike approach, but it was enormously amateur. We had this
tiny cottage, which didn’t have central heating—it was very cold in
winter—and I’d got one person working in the living room with their
things on the piano, one person in the guest room, and me and the baby
in another room. It was just a buzzing little hive—without knowing what
it was that I was trying to do, and getting very surprised at some of
the difficulties of business. People took a long time to pay their
bills, and the bank was saying to me that I should ask for progress
payments; and me getting very uppity and replying, “I’m not a butcher.
This is a professional service, and I’ll do the job first and then put
my bill in.” I hadn’t got a clue\! I learned, of course, because that is
how you learn. But it was incredibly modest. I had a baby in this
period, and things almost stopped towards the end of my pregnancy; but
nominally the business kept going.

**Abbate:**

Were there other businesses like this that you knew of?

**Shirley:**

No, not at all. The concept of home-basing, and freelancing, and not
employing people, just was not known. I went out of my way to try and
meet the few business women in the sector, and I only found one, who was
Dina St. Johnston, who ran an organization called Vaughan Programming
Services, which stayed around a long time. I went to see her, and she
was very helpful in talking about the business, but I came away
horrified: “If being in business is going to make me into that sort of
person, I don’t want to be it; I want a different sort of business.”
Because she talked entirely in terms of figures and measures and
numbers; and for me, the numbers are important—they have to be done—but
they are not the purpose or the be-all of the business. They are almost
a necessary evil; and of course that makes me very “uncommercial” by
most commercial people’s standards.

I’m much more interested in the people; always have been; I think I
always shall be. An entrepreneur uses opportunity in a slightly
different way: I would make jobs to fit people that were in the
business, rather than, as the professionals do (and I’ve occasionally
learned to do myself), make a job spec. “What does this require? What
are the essential attributes of the successful candidate?” and so on,
and then you acquire people to fill that particular profile of something
that you want. I’ve always done it the other way: the people are in
there first. Anyways, quite different.

Dina St. Johnston is somebody actually who ought to be on your list.

**Abbate:**

Is she still alive?

**Shirley:**

Well, I know her husband is, and I’ve got a contact for him if you need
it. But she was \[in the business\] before me.

**Abbate:**

Was that part-time, or was she doing it full-time?

**Shirley:**

Oh, I think it was full-time. It was a breakaway group from the Elliott
Brothers, and I think they just did Elliott work, and it may just have
been three of them. But it was an early software house: Vaughan
Programming Services. Years later I was mortified to learn that Elsie
Shutt had launched Computations Inc. in Boston back in 1957 and operated
it in much the same way as we did, utilising home-based women
programmers.

### Finding the Programmers

**Abbate:**

How did you recruit your programmers?

**Shirley:**

Almost all by word of mouth, and through women’s networks. What I was
doing was so strange that I’d get a radio interview or something for
thirty seconds, and then there’d be a flood of correspondence coming in
from women who also wanted to work—because there was nothing available
part-time, home-based, for women doing technical work.

**Abbate:**

Had you looked for it? Did you try asking, or was it just completely
obvious that there was nothing?

**Shirley:**

Oh, it was completely obvious: There was nothing there. There was an
agency that I used; it was a woman’s agency, and it was for part-time. A
woman called Joan Wilkins placed part-time positions for various
professions—it wasn’t just computing—and again, was one of these tough
ladies, very businesslike. We never actually did business together, but
I think we tried to.

I’m not a stereotypical businesswoman at all; the fact that I survived
was an enormous surprise to all my friends and colleagues—and me too\!
Because there are so many things that I find much more important in life
than money, and business is usually: money is way, way at the top. It
may not be the sole thing, but it is right at the top. For me it’s there
somewhere, of course. Certainly it became obvious, in the seventies
recession, that without some sort of break-even, \[we couldn’t stay in
business.\] I mean, it was a crusade—somebody called it a crusade, and
that’s about right. We didn’t use the word “mission”; it was a crusade.
It became much more focused on women—opportunities for women to go on
working in a professional level—and that was more important than the
technology; more important than the money side.

\[Recording pauses\]

**Abbate:**

So it sounds like you never had trouble recruiting employees—or
associates, rather. Did it literally start out as just you?

**Shirley:**

Yes. When I was pregnant I told people the company had “one and a bit”
staff\!

The social scene at that time was that women, especially in the North of
England, worked for economic reasons, but wives of men in white-collar
type jobs did not work; they looked after the home, looked after the
family. It was very difficult to make sure that my husband was not
denigrated because I was working. People would say—including my mother,
for example—”Oh\! I thought Derek had a good job.” And one really had to
be very careful to keep that balance; for a long time I struggled to
keep my own earnings below my husband’s. Because there was just the
sheer macho image that the man was not only the father, the man was the
leader of the family, and women were very much secondary citizens. There
were many things we couldn’t do: you couldn’t drive a bus, you couldn’t
go on the stock exchange, you couldn’t open a bank account: you know,
there were lots of things you couldn’t do. Women didn’t; they didn’t
want to. They were very happy to be supported.

**Abbate:** You couldn’t open a bank account?

**Shirley:**

No. Without his signature, no.

**Abbate:**

Wow\!

**Shirley:**

“Wow,” yes\! Then there were hangovers from the Women to Property Act.
You’d have to look up the history, but women were not allowed to own
property until quite late on in the nineteenth century. You just didn’t
do that. And now, young women—to my delight\!—you take it for granted
that you can do each and every thing, and there are only a few things
that you can’t do. You can’t be a bishop in this country. It’ll come\! I
remember when the first black bishop was appointed. \[Imitates a
horrified whisper\]: “We can’t have a Negro for a bishop\!” So it’s
opened up, now. Today all the difficulties are cultural and social, but
they’re not legal.

### Finding Clients

**Abbate:**

Where were you living at this point?

**Shirley:**

In London. And London, I guess, was better than the provinces.

**Abbate:**

So how did you get your first clients, or jobs?

**Shirley:**

\[Pause.\] Bother, I’ve forgotten which it actually was that I first got
. . . They were always by introductions, really, in the early days: an
ex-colleague.

**Abbate:**

You mentioned something—was it from ICL?

**Shirley:**

I did some work for my ex-employer, but I don’t think that was the very
first one. One of the important strategic ones was an ex-colleague who
introduced me to Urwick-Orr , who were coming in from the States and
planning to set up in the U.K.; they became Urwick-Diebold in this
country. They wanted a set of standards to be developed for their
computer service, before the first person was even appointed. That was a
very valuable introduction, to actually have the opportunity to be paid
to work on such standards; and we were commissioned to update them later
on, also. Of course, they became the basis of our own standards.
Certainly that was a personal introduction.

Selection Trust was for the City. I don’t know how that came, but it was
an important contract, because it was on something called PERT:
Programme Evaluation and Review Technique. And that took us into a whole
series of PERT assignments, because we then became specialists.

But what really happened was: I was a scientist. I was used to
mathematical programming; I was interested in that and skilled in that;
but the market wasn’t there. We wrote an early compiler, for example.
There was this commercial work coming up, which I was quite sniffy
about; the only interest it had was the big volume stuff: how did you
deal with these large files? There were masses of theoretical work about
writing Sort routines. We did a lot of this through introductions via a
company called Business Operations Research; in fact, they nearly took
us over—well, they made a bid to take us over. It was the operational
research side: the scientific interest of the commercial work. The money
associated, the economic incentive for stock control, and transportation
problems, logistics generally—British Rail became a client; and at the
same time they had some technical interest that interested me.

But of course, after a time it wasn’t me actually doing the work
anymore. I was just saying, “Well, I’ll work as project manager and
supervisor”—I didn’t even have the terms\!—and was responsible for the
work and checking it, but other people were writing the software. What
became important was our way of operating: the fact that we had a whole
lot of women, each working very remotely, communicating almost entirely
by post and phone—we wore little badges, so we would recognize each
other when we had to actually turn up with a client\! And the dislike of
the customers (we called them “clients” then, because we thought it was
more professional) to think of their work being done in this cottage
industry sort of way.

**Abbate:**

Was that because they felt they didn’t have control over it?

**Shirley:**

They didn’t have control. And women\! “Goodness gracious, these
housewives\! What’re they going to do?” And we did \[have problems\]—you
know, the cat walked across the work one day: Grrr\! \[laughs.\] It was
difficult to present a professional image, indeed be professional.

But our way of operation forced us into an assessment of work content.
It forced us into a strict work regime. It forced us into measuring work
done, and payment by work done, so that we could offer customers
fixed-priced, fixed-delivery. They were small bits of software; six
man-weeks would be the sort of unit that we would think was quite a big
job in the first year. Being forced to do that—so that the clients were
not really told how the work was done; they knew how it was done, but it
was not stressed in any way—actually led us to become a prime mover in
the promotion of software, because we could really manage software—and
everybody else said it was unmanageable. Programmers always were saying,
“It’ll be finished next week; we’ll finish next week.” There was always
some other little bug to get out of it. And looking back, I realize that
the Urwick-Orr assignment, and the fact that we did go fixed-price,
really moved the organization forward.

### Developing Employee Skills

We took some big risks. When COBOL was introduced, we thought that would
be the end of the company, that nobody would be buying software
anymore—programming—because it was just so easy. And then we realized,
“No, there’s still quite a lot to do,” and we took the risk of training
a hundred people in COBOL before we got our first COBOL assignment.
They’re quite small things now, but at the time it was achingly
stressful to keep going. When the ‘70s recession came, my pride was at
stake, and the crusade for women as professional workers in this or any
other industry was very much at stake. I was absolutely determined that
we were not going to be a fair-weather company that was fine as long as
their market was easy, and collapsed. So we hung in there, just—but it
was really very bad. I didn’t have the skills, I had no capital, I
hadn’t a clue what to do. When we came out, of course, a lot of the
competition had gone away, and we were still just there.

I suppose one was determined then to get a few more skills in. I
believe, in business, that it’s some of the difficulties that develop
strengths. Before the recession, there had been a project, in about
1967, which had gone badly wrong, and which we’d had to salvage at
enormous cost—emotional, financial, everything. When we survived that
one, we really put in a whole lot of safeguards and standards, and the
earlier stuff came in useful. We eventually developed a “cookbook”
philosophy: anyone joining the company had very little induction
face-to-face, but they had a great big cookbook that told them how to
write a letter, how to respond to this, how to do that, how to get their
stuff checked, and so on. And this was, of course, when there was
nothing online. If you wrote a program using paper and pencil, and a
flow-charting template, and so on, you would then send it off to a
computer center, and wait perhaps three or four days for it to come
back—to be told, “It never even got started, your input routine wasn’t
right\!” It was pretty cumbersome. We had contracts later on that
implied we could only deliver if we got two turn-rounds on the computer
every week. Two every week\! \[laughter.\] Now we do it two in a minute:
you try something, if it doesn’t work, try something else. It was
different. But anyway, we got in there.

The unbundling of software by IBM in the ‘70s really threw us as
well—but threw us in a good way, because suddenly people were charging
for software for the very first time, and that’s what we’d always been
doing. Because previously people got it free. And we launched at that
time a company called F2, which was concerned much more with systems and
consultancy. Because we were getting categorized as “coders”: whereas
“programming” had been everything from the top-level consultancy
advising on computer systems, advising on computer hardware, developing
systems, writing systems, documenting systems, and training people to
use systems, suddenly “programming” began to mean just the writing, and
we didn’t want to get stuck there. So we launched a separate company in
‘72\.

**Abbate:**

What was typically the scope of your responsibility? Would a client call
and say, “Here’s the general thing we want to do,” and you had to do
specifications and coding and all the way through testing? Or how did
that typically work?

**Shirley:**

I can remember sitting in the garden one day, with a senior policeman
asking, “Do you think you could write a program for fingerprint
analysis, that would match fingerprints? And I said, “That’s a very
interesting sort of problem. Let me think about it.” I thought a pretty
long time and eventually decided that that was a bit beyond my scope,
and had the sense to say “No.” For it took some thirty years before that
one came out\! Others would be very clear: “Here is the formula. I want
it graphed. It’s absolutely a massive computational exercise. Would you
do it, check it?” or something.

The standards one was important; the compiler one was important. Alex
d’Agapeyeff, who led Computer Analysts and Programmers, tells how he
received a telegram: “How much for COBOL compiler, question mark?”
\[laughter.\] All sorts of things happened. It was a very amateur sort
of world. And it could be anywhere. By the way in which we were
structured, it was easier to do the programming bits, frankly—the coding
bits—but to me, it all goes together. And the company still has—it made
an acquisition last year of a company called Druid, to take it into more
high-level consultancy; because I think one does have to eventually have
that, at least a part. It was quite a mix. The scientific work by that
time had completely dropped off; the operations research work. You can
still see traces of it in the emphasis on logistics.

But I became a businesswoman, really, and got very interested in
training of technical staff, and the running of a business—but a hybrid
manager, somebody who could understand the management of the business
and the IT. Certainly I did quite a bit with the British Computer
Society then, and was doing new things. I was involved in the merger of
the two trade associations of this country: COSBA, which is something
like “Computing something Service Bureaux Association,” and SHA,
“Software Houses Association,” and that became the Computing Services
and Software Association. I was involved in the merger of that, and was
part of setting up the first standing consortium of software houses, and
I was involved in quality control.

So I became much more the manager and driver and, in the company, the
product saleswoman. It’s sad, when you go into business, that as it
grows, you are able to delegate some chunks of it, but they have to be
defined chunks that are attractive to somebody else—so I went through
phases where I got left with all the nasty, dodgy, itsy-bitsy things\!
But nobody seemed to be able to sell, and I’m a saleswoman, really. I
used to love it, and to me, to make a sale is persuading a customer to
look at it my way. It was really quirky. I always saw it in terms of
employment, because my motivation was to provide work—as I used to refer
to it—”work for women with children.” And I was always thinking, “Well,
this will keep three people employed; this is a job for seventeen
people; this is a job for only one person, but it’ll run for many
years.” My motivation was not the conventional one.

### Targeting Women Employees

**Abbate:**

Did you only hire women with children?

**Shirley:**

Initially, yes. We characterized them as: high-priority was women who
were the breadwinners, unmarried mothers—again, rather different in
those days, and not as accepted as they are today—and people with severe
disabilities. Then there were women with children, but there was a
breadwinner in the background—and during the ‘70s recession, it was
quite important that there was. And then women without children, perhaps
pregnant. Without capital behind me, without commercial experience, I
recall the risk—the stomach-aching risk—of taking on somebody for six
weeks in a summer vacation when we hadn’t got any work for them. And
saying, “I will get work for them; this person has super skills”—and
really thinking, “What am I going to do if we haven’t got work for
them?” Because we hadn’t got any savings; there was no money behind
the company; it was really very, very small. But I eventually learned to
control these things.

Looking back, I believe I was just the right person to go into business.
It allowed me to do everything that I’ve always wanted to do. Business
allows you to be free to go any direction you like—as long as you can
find a market, as long as you remain legal, as long as you can find
people to do it for you. And I’m good at picking good people, before
they are obviously good.

### Managing the Business

**Abbate:**

Did you try to anticipate the market? You mentioned COBOL; did you
decide, “Well, COBOL is the thing of the future; let’s all learn COBOL?”
Were you trying to be strategic?

**Shirley:**

I hadn’t even heard the word. I was a mathematician, not a commercial
person. English education didn’t teach commerce. No, I was rushing
around in all directions. Anything that moved, I’d have a go at it\!
\[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

There were enough opportunities?

**Shirley:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

### Promoting the Professionalism of the Company

Did you have to work hard to have the company be taken seriously by new
clients?

**Shirley:**

I think everyone was laughing at me\! But not to my face. The press were
very kind to me, and I asked a journalist many years later why they
hadn’t knocked me. He replied, “We saw you as a source of good
stories, and didn’t want to kill the goose that laid the golden eggs.”
\[laughter.\] It was laughable\! And the headlines: “Steve and Her
Girls.” Which reminds me: of course, my name is Stephanie, and in the
first year or so I was writing business development letters, trying to
get appointments to see people, and getting next to no response. My
husband suggested that I abbreviate my name to Steve, and this I did;
and it seemed to me that I got a better response—was through that door
and facing somebody before people realized my gender\! And I’ve been
Steve ever since. But you then got “Steve and Her Girls,” and “Steve has
been made a Fellow of the British Computer Society”—all sorts of gender
jokes, some quite sexist. But we were careful; we were very, very prim
and proper, so as not to be seen as sex objects. We never talked about
it, but you knew very well that women were not expected to operate at
that level. You were somebody to be laughed at, somebody to be flirted
with, somebody whose bottom you could pinch. I defy you to sell a major
project to somebody who is pinching your bottom\!

It was a woman’s company—of women, for women—and we learned to support
each other. That’s partly my management style, that you would have a
team, and sometimes you would be the leader and I would be the auditor,
and other times I would be the leader and you would be auditor and
somebody else would be the technician; and we really learned to use each
other’s skills to work together, even though we were physically remote.
Externally, we had enormous formality. It was always “Mrs. Shirley”;
socially, I was very much unavailable\! We didn’t allow trousers for a
long, long time, because we didn’t want to be seen as “pseudo-men.” It
was a quite an effort—now that I think about it, how much effort we put
into it without realizing it—to make sure that we were seen as
professional, that people didn’t giggle when we came in through the
door. Most of the women have moved on and up.

But it was that absolute crusade. We did a research contract for
government to do an advanced Computer Techniques Project, and there was
a big progress meeting, and I turned around and apparently glared at
somebody coming through the door with a toddler in a pushchair\! Luckily
it was a civil servant, the client, \[rather than a member of our
company\]. I would not allow any sign of domesticity to appear, because
we were very vulnerable. I had a tape of somebody typing in the
background, so that when I was on the phone it would sound as if I’d got
an office behind me\! \[laughter.\] And we presented our work very
carefully. I was always—well, the same is true today: if I can find a
better way of doing it, I’ll immediately change to do it. We had an
early white-on-black photocopier. We were always doing the latest thing,
partly just for interest, but also for presentational reasons, that our
work had to look very good. And there were little disasters, which I
remember; where the cat did walk over some letter that was carefully
done—and we didn’t have word processors in those days. We couldn’t just
churn it off again, but had to sit and do it again. We had spirit
duplicators for when we needed lots of copies. Do you remember carbon
paper?

**Abbate:**

Oh, yes.

**Shirley:**

Yes. It was clumsy, but we had a lot of fun.

When you’re working part-time, you have a lot of time to think about
what you’re doing. You’re not going to sit at the desk anymore until
tomorrow, but actually, while you’re doing other things you’re still—I
think, from the software point of view, you have it mulling around, so
when you do sit down, you’re quite effective. I used to claim—without
justification, but other people have measured it since—that our
productivity was about 20% higher. It’s around that figure. You don’t
waste time traveling; you get a lot of that free thinking time; and
creative work is done in isolation. You may develop in teams, but
creative work, that spark, you do yourself, in the small hours of the
night. We were good.

**Abbate:**

Do you think women tend to bring a different set of skills and attitudes
to the job than men might have?

**Shirley:**

I don’t think so, really. People talk about left brain and right brain,
and so on. I copied IBM for a lot of things. It was easy to do so,
because for many years IBM would not employ part-time systems engineers;
so when some of their good systems engineers—the women—married and
wanted to go on to part-time for whatever reason, they had to leave—and
they came to us, beautifully trained\! \[laughter.\] Absolutely sharp\!

### Focus on Training Employees

**Abbate:**

So, what did you copy from IBM?

**Shirley:**

Oh, they were always in front: in marketing, in the emphasis on
training; they were really good. And I trained, trained, trained . . . .

**Abbate:**

Did you have in-house training courses, or informally . . .?

**Shirley:**

We tried to train each other. In the early days, people would ring me up
and say, “Hey, we’ve got this course. We need ten people, and we’ve only
got eight. Would you like to make up the numbers, so that it doesn’t
look too empty?” We used to grab any opportunity like that. A lot of
self-training. We got diverted at one time into designing computer-based
training, and . . . oh, it wasn’t for long. But we’d try a lot of
things, really. How did we train? Just by doing it, I guess. I don’t
remember anything specific on training.

This gender issue: I mean, there were a lot of stereotypes. I think we
overqualified; we made sure that our people had a qualification to
offer. Many of them came in with B.Sc.’s or Ph.D.’s; the fact that it
might be in something totally unrelated didn’t seem to matter. When
counseling women in that era, I would always say, “Get that
qualification\!” Certainly I did; I mean, nobody could say I was not
qualified to do a job. I wanted to do an M.B.A., for example. I soon
found I didn’t know how to run a business, and wanted to go to Harvard,
which was then the only place that did an M.B.A.—we didn’t have them in
this country—and you had to have (I believe for the bedroom
arrangements) women only in pairs\! \[laughs.\] I couldn’t find anyone
to pair with; and I couldn’t have found anybody to do the baby-sitting,
anyway.

Again, you forget that . . . Well, if you’ve only got double bedrooms or
something like that—I mean, everything is very difficult if \[the
physical environment doesn’t accommodate both sexes\]. There was some
work at the Post Office Research Station that would have normally had me
go on their research ship; it’s a cable ship, Monarch. They didn’t have
women’s toilets\! When I went to Northampton Polytechnic, doing a
postgraduate in statistics: again, no women’s toilet. Well, they didn’t
have women students. But everything was very, very difficult, and
somebody’s got to be first to push through the door—and then it’s easier
for the next one.

I’m conscious—I still do it today—that I try and act as a role model for
women. I just this week accepted a fellowship at the Royal Academy of
Engineering, and thought, “Why am I doing this? I don’t really want it.”
And you think, “Because there are so few women engineers, and we need
people there to show it can be done, so people will see a few women’s
faces.” Not only to show it can be done, but also that it can be done in
a feminine way. We developed in the company quite a style of
dressing—which was not trouser suits in those days; in fact, we
actually had an in-house style that said “no trouser suits” at one time.
But years later, women would arrive at the station in Hemel
Hempstead—quite a large station; Hemel Hempstead’s quite a large
place—and the taxi driver would say to a complete stranger, a woman:
“Oh, are you going for an interview at FI?” Because they were sharply
dressed; they each had their own style, and they were always
well-groomed. And we found this to be quite important, so that we didn’t
come over as “butch.”

**Abbate:**

It’s a fine line.

**Shirley:**

It’s a very fine line\! One woman, called Jenny Williams—beautifully
groomed and lovely woman—if she were going on a sales call, she would
change just before she got to the client, so that her outfit was not
crumpled when she got in. She was like a bandbox\! I would keep a list
as to what I’ve worn to each client, so they didn’t always see me in the
one good suit I’d got, but I wouldn’t go quite to that length. I’m still
pretty careful and don’t go out looking scruffy if I can help it.

### Balancing Work and Family

**Abbate:**

How hard was it for you to balance your work and family
responsibilities? Because it doesn’t sound like you were really working
part-time.

**Shirley:**

What went was social life. Things that many women would do, like
cooking: we eat food; I don’t cook. Things other people would do,
reading: it just all went. I mean, I looked after the family—not very
well. Somebody did a study of dual career families and wrote about
me—and it was under my name, it wasn’t anonymous—using a phrase which
I can quote now: “Like many women of her ilk, she is indifferent to the
appearance of her home.” And I was devastated\! I’m very far from
indifferent; I just think there are other things more important. Now I
can afford a bit of help. But it really made me think, “My goodness\! I
live in such a muddle of papers and babies and food and telephones and
people working, and stoking up the coal fires to keep the staff
warm—quite apart from me—and then just to \[be publicly denigrated\].”
So a lot of things went. I said earlier, if you do actually have some
crusade that really is important to you, then you just focus on the
things that are important. I only do things that I believe are
important. I’m starting to take more holidays, but I haven’t had a
holiday for two years. I just don’t spend time on things that other
people do, and I regret it sometimes, but in the main, I do the things
that I do want to do.

**Abbate:**

Was your husband still an academic at that point?

**Shirley:**No, he’s never been an academic. He was a physicist. I
overtook him, at least financially; he’s much brighter than I am, but he
hasn’t got the drive and the energy; he’s a deep thinker. And while he’s
supportive and has been very happy for me to develop my own career, when
asked, he has said things like, “I always knew she was going to do
something different; I didn’t know what it was.” But he is—apparently
without much difficulty—very proud of what I’ve achieved, and does not
feel threatened by it. I think I’ve been over-sensitive about it. In the
early days, for example, when one used to take one’s washing to the
launderette, it was always me that carried the washing. I did not let
him be seen doing something very domestic, when men didn’t do that at
all. So it was behind the scenes. He now does the cooking and things.
Life is just so different now.

But his career has certainly been subsumed in mine. Two things happened,
really. Our son was profoundly handicapped, and my husband’s job was
transferred when the Post Office Research Station was moved to
Martlesham, Suffolk . It would have meant us moving, and with such a
very difficult child, for whom we’d got some sort of schooling, and
things going on, we just could not move him out of county. So Derek took
a job in the city, and—bless his cotton socks—did a job that he hated
for many years, because he couldn’t afford to give it up, because there
was a pension and all that. We considered whether we could afford to get
him out, and we just couldn’t afford to give up that pension, and so he
stuck out this foul job for many years, and then took early retirement.
That was really to help the family. It was difficult for women,
difficult for families; but we’ve somehow managed to stay together.

### Satisfaction of working with Computers

**Abbate:**

What have you found to be the most satisfying aspects of working with
computers?

**Shirley:**

The people\! \[laughs.\] The people: bright, intelligent, wanting to do
innovative things. I like people anyway, but I particularly like bright
people, and young people, and that sort of atmosphere. I like doing new
things. I like seeing things that I seeded years ago becoming, not
necessarily mainstream, but established; and people that I’ve worked
with many years ago achieving in their own right.

The technology. The Internet today is at a stage that the software
industry was in the ‘60s: needing to be regulated. Absolutely
inevitable. There’s a long list of various things that I have innovated.
I’m currently in the process of working on an Internet Institute, which
will be a first worldwide. I did the first disability conference on the
Internet a few years ago, and got a portal site running on the Internet
on the condition of autism, and I’m quite proud of that; it has about
10,000 members at the moment. Those are the concepts of mine that I get
other people to do in a sort of commercial way. I try always to view
things from a strategic level. You asked before, “Was there strategy in
the early days?” and the answer was “No.” There certainly is now. Plenty
of people doing and buzzing, and I’m thinking always: “How can I move
this up? How can I move it up a gear?” And so in ‘97, I think, I was
debating in the House of Lords here the philosophy of the Internet, in
particular things like pornography, law, ethics, etc. We’d got the
Bishop of London on one side, and me on the other—because these are real
issues that somebody has got to think about; they’re not technical. Is
this a new world? Are there new pieces of legislation required? What is
happening to people, as we invent more and more bits of hardware and
software? These are issues that I now have time to perhaps contribute
to.

I was also on the founding court of the livery company in the City of
London, which is now number one hundred. I was not one of the founders;
I do respect those founders. I was not one of the three, but was invited
to become part of the Founding Court.

**Abbate:**

This is the Worshipful Company of Information Technologists?

**Shirley:**

Yes. Which is very active in the three things that livery companies
always are, which are commerce—now, that’s me, isn’t it?—education
(that’s me), and charity. I’m really a serial entrepreneur now; I
start things, largely in the charitable area. So that’s really going
great guns; but it’s the Internet now that’s fascinating me. I’ve been
an independent director of Tandem Computers from ‘92 to ‘97, and
certainly my input was not technical. I think the best thing I did there
was to help the founder step back—because he was finding it very
difficult, and having done it myself, I was able to help him see that
there is a life beyond. Because, I mean, I was thirty-one years with
what is now Xansa —a long, long time to then walk away from it.

But the things that are international, that are philosophic, that are
strategic, that are legal—I really try now to spend my time on those
things. Because technically, I’m sure I’m never going to innovate
anything at all; but I’m sometimes able to make a new insight that’s
really nothing to do with the technology—and I’ve always been more
interested in the social impact.

The e-commerce. The other company that I’m independent director of is
the John Lewis Partnership. That’s a co-owned retail organization that
employs 55,000 people. My interest in it is because of the co-ownership,
but also, they were very stuck in mainframe computing, and I’ve helped
to give them confidence to move into electronic commerce. It’s a
two-year contract. They’re a super company. Just bought out a dot-com in
the U.K. John Lewis Partnership also bought a quarter stake in LMS
\[Last Mile Solutions\], which is going to be the first distribution
center. I’m just a businesswoman there. I’ve certainly helped them quite
a bit on corporate governance, but I’m trying to add to their ability to
see computing as doing the right things, rather than just things right.
The first time I went to their computing group, for example, they had
terribly clever people, certainly doing things right, and I thought,
“They’re not too bad\!” But I am able to question, “Are we doing the
right things with computing? What I’m hearing is ‘cost-cutting,’ and
‘cost-saving,’ and ‘efficiency,’ and things. Come on\! There are new
ways of getting to the customers—these are the things that this retail
organization needs to be looking at much more seriously. What are we
doing on the telecom side? You’re still talking about computing—these
are networks\!”

I believe there are different roles for people at different stages in
life. For example: I’m very interested in contemporary art—built quite a
big collection in one of the charities that I started—but the other
period of art that I like is the sixties. Why am I so attracted to the
sixties? Well, of course, I was doing my best work then—or at least my
best technical work—and I’m naturally intrigued by the sort of work that
other people were doing in the sixties. It was a very vital period,
anyway.

All right, how are we doing?

**Abbate:**

Pretty good.

**Shirley:**

In 1981, I started the use of information technology as a communication
aid for people with disabilities in this country. It was already being
used for logistics, for wheelchair control and things like that; but to
use it to allow deaf to hear or blind to see—that was quite new. I spent
a couple of years on that, I suppose.

**Abbate:**

You had asked me to bring up Hilary Cropper. I don’t remember when she
came on.

**Shirley:**

She was the third attempt to manage succession in FI, and she came in in
1985 from ICL. And what my earlier comment reminded me was that after we
had made the appointment—she came in as managing director, potentially
chief executive—a Board member from ICL said, “Of course, had she been a
man, she would have been on the board by now.”

**Abbate:**

At ICL?

**Shirley:**

At ICL. In 1985 people were still saying things like that. It was a
private conversation, of course; but there was still that enormous
blockage.

**Abbate:**

So she had hit the glass ceiling at ICL?

**Shirley:**

Yes, which is dreadful. And she has done wonders for the company\!

**Shirley:**

There are a couple of things about Hilary, and so on. I’ve had an
enormous disability because I’ve been the first women in most places,
very often the only woman; and a lot of the time I still am. I’m in the
U.S. National Women’s Hall of Fame and have been much honored. Each time
I think, “Is this good for women?” I care about the position of women in
public life, in business, in all sorts of aspects; in career
progressions, in career counseling. It is appalling how low the
aspirations are for many women.

### Final Thoughts

**Abbate:**

Did you have mentors or role models yourself? Other than the negative
one?

**Shirley:**

Well, no; except the negative one.

But I wanted to mention that I met Grace Hopper—and she must be part of
your study—and she acted as a role model. There was a lunch I went to,
only about twelve of us or so. She said to me that she envied me,
because she had had the choice of either working or having a family, and
I had somehow managed to do both. And she must have been in her 70s, but
certainly seemed a lot older, and was obviously regretful looking back.
She said her sister had made the other choice and had given up working
for domesticity and family.

We always discuss whether technical competence is misaligned with
femininity, and that’s a real issue when we try to attract women and
girls into the industry. And we similarly have this imbalance, that if
you’re in business you can’t have a family—well, nowadays people do, by
paid childcare, but that’s not really a family life. I think you can
have both, but you have to give up something. I have given up quite a
bit. But nevertheless, I look back on my career and feel fulfilled; I
have done what is in me to do. And I cannot imagine an industry better
suited for women today. And I think, on that note, unless you’ve got
some particular questions you want to ask. . .

**Abbate:**

But to follow up on that: Do you think that computing has become more
open to women over time, less open, or about the same?

**Shirley:**

Any discipline that matures, from a sort of start-up discipline, starts
to put up barriers; and if the people in authority are themselves male,
they will instinctively \[laughs\] put up barriers that keep it male. So
as the industry has become more structured—as it has to be—women are
backing off from degree courses called “computer science.” Call the same
course “business systems,” and they’ll sign up. So there are some very
subtle social and cultural things going on. It is entirely open, but
women find it difficult. And it’s this full-time/part-time lack of
flexibility, and the demand that “Things should always be done in the
way that I do.” Young people are not just younger versions of today’s
managers; they will have their own ways of doing things. When we sit on
interview boards and all the things that we do, one mustn’t think, “This
is how I do it, so this is how everybody else has got to do it.” So
there are some barriers to women. But they’re not as bad as they’re
perceived. Prospects are really good. Concepts such as diversity are
being debated seriously. So we’ve come a long way.

**Abbate:**

Do you have any advice for young women who are contemplating computer
careers today?

**Shirley:**

Lots\! Do get trained. Present yourself at your aspirational level and
apply for interesting jobs. Master finance and marketing and get
international experience. Think strategically about how you want to
spend your life.

There’s never been a more exciting career path offering the flexibility
valued by women’s life styles. Go for it\!

Retrieved from
"<http://ethw.org/index.php?title=Oral-History:Dame_Stephanie_(Steve)_Shirley&oldid=108313>"

[Categories](/Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* [Business](/Category:Business "Category:Business")
* [Business
  continuity](/Category:Business_continuity "Category:Business continuity")
* [Customer relationship
  management](/Category:Customer_relationship_management "Category:Customer relationship management")
* [Industrial
  relations](/Category:Industrial_relations "Category:Industrial relations")
* [Computer
  industry](/Category:Computer_industry "Category:Computer industry")
* [Quality
  management](/Category:Quality_management "Category:Quality management")
* [Software development
  management](/Category:Software_development_management "Category:Software development management")
* [Technology
  management](/Category:Technology_management "Category:Technology management")
* [Corporations](/Category:Corporations "Category:Corporations")

## Contents

* [1 About Dame Stephanie (Steve)
  Shirley](#About_Dame_Stephanie_.28Steve.29_Shirley)
* [2 About the Interview](#About_the_Interview)
* [3 Copyright Statement](#Copyright_Statement)
* [4 Interview](#Interview)
  * [4\.1 Kindertransport and Childhood in
    England](#Kindertransport_and_Childhood_in_England)
  * [4\.2 Education](#Education)
  * [4\.3 First Employment](#First_Employment)
  * [4\.4 Early Career with Computers](#Early_Career_with_Computers)
  * [4\.5 Switching to the ICL](#Switching_to_the_ICL)
  * [4\.6 Starting her own Company](#Starting_her_own_Company)
  * [4\.7 Finding the Programmers](#Finding_the_Programmers)
  * [4\.8 Finding Clients](#Finding_Clients)
  * [4\.9 Developing Employee Skills](#Developing_Employee_Skills)
  * [4\.10 Targeting Women Employees](#Targeting_Women_Employees)
  * [4\.11 Managing the Business](#Managing_the_Business)
  * [4\.12 Promoting the Professionalism of the
    Company](#Promoting_the_Professionalism_of_the_Company)
  * [4\.13 Focus on Training Employees](#Focus_on_Training_Employees)
  * [4\.14 Balancing Work and Family](#Balancing_Work_and_Family)
  * [4\.15 Satisfaction of working with
    Computers](#Satisfaction_of_working_with_Computers)
  * [4\.16 Final Thoughts](#Final_Thoughts)

[![Powered by
MediaWiki](/resources/assets/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)](//www.mediawiki.org/)
[![Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki](/extensions/SemanticMediaWiki/includes/../resources/images/smw_button.png)](https://www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 21 November 2014, at 10:42\.

* This page has been accessed 6,003 times.

* [About ETHW](/ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* [Policies and disclaimers](/ETHW:Policies "ETHW:Policies")

