Toggle navigation   

ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki(Main_Page)

* ** Go ****()
  * Browse by Subject(ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * Encyclopedia(Encyclopedia)
  
  * Oral Histories(Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * First Hand Histories(First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * LandmarksMilestones(/Landmarks)
  
  * Archives(Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * Education(ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * Random page(Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * Help(Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * Contact us(Special:Contact)
  
  * 
  * Recent changes(Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * New pages(Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* ** Actions ****()
  * View
    source(index.php?title=Oral-History:Jean_Bartik&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source e")
  
  * History(index.php?title=Oral-History:Jean_Bartik&action=history "Past revisions of this page [h]")
  
  * 
  * Oral-History(Oral-History:Jean_Bartik)
  
  * Discussion(index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Jean_Bartik&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page [t]")
  
  * 
* ** Tools ****()
  * What links
    here(Special:WhatLinksHere/Oral-History:Jean_Bartik "A list of all wiki pages that link here j]")
  
  * Related
    changes(Special:RecentChangesLinked/Oral-History:Jean_Bartik "Recent changes in pages linked from this page k]")
  
  * Special
    pages(Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages q]")
  
  * Printable
    version(index.php?title=Oral-History:Jean_Bartik&printable=yes "Printable version of this page p]")
  
  * Permanent
    link(index.php?title=Oral-History:Jean_Bartik&oldid=108405 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * Page
    information(index.php?title=Oral-History:Jean_Bartik&action=info)
  
  * Browse properties(Special:Browse/Oral-2DHistory:Jean_Bartik)
* ** Account ****(# "Account")
  * Log
    in(index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3AJean+Bartik)
  
  * 
  * Request account(Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Jean Bartik

## About Jean Bartik

Jean Bartik(Jean_Bartik "Jean Bartik") was one of the original women
programmers of the ENIAC(ENIAC "ENIAC") computer. Bartik's work, in
conjunction with a group of women programmers, would completely change
the face of computing. Bartik was a pioneer in the field of computer
programming and as a woman, she faced and overcame several hurdles in
the field as well.

Born Betty Jean Jennings, Bartik was raised in rural Missouri and
attended Northwest Missouri State Teachers College where she received a
math degree. In 1945, Bartik left for Philadelphia and began working on
the ENIAC project, forming part of a crucial group of women programmers.

After her work on the ENIAC, Bartik continued to work on computing.
Joining John Presper Eckert and John W. Mauchly, she worked on the
UNIVAC(UNIVAC "UNIVAC") computer. Shortly after the UNIVAC, Bartik
left the computing industry to begin a family and resumed professional
work in the computing field in several years later. After her layoff,
Bartik decided to go into real estate, where she remained for the
remainder of her life.

In 2009, Ms. Bartik received a Pioneer Award from the IEEE Computer
Society, and in 2008 she was named a fellow by the Computer History
Museum in Mountain View, Calif. Bartik died on March 23, 2011 of
congestive heart disease.

In this interview, reflects on her upbringing in rural Missouri, her
part in the ENIAC project, and the role of women in the history of
computing in the US.

## About the Interview

JEAN BARTIK: An Interview Conducted by Janet Abbate, IEEE History
Center, 3 August 2001

Interview \# 576 for the IEEE History Center, The Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.

\

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
the IEEE History Center Oral History Program, IEEE History Center at
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ
07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include identification of
the specific passages to be quoted, anticipated use of the passages, and
identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Jean Bartik, an oral history conducted in 2001 by Janet Abbate, IEEE
History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

\

## Interview

INTERVIEW: Jean Bartik\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: 3 August 2001\
PLACE: Jean Bartik’s home in Oaklyn, New Jersey

\

### Growing up in Rural Missouri

**Abbate:**

If I can start at the beginning, when were you born and where did you
grow up?

**Bartik:**

I was born December the 27th, 1924, in a farm in Gentry County,
Missouri. We were on dirt roads, so I grew up in a pretty isolated
environment. In fact, until I was in college, I’d never been more than
forty miles from home. We did have a car, but when the roads were muddy
or snowy we used horses. My father was a school teacher, and he always
used to have a big, long-legged riding horse; they were always “King” or
“Rex” or something like that. And of course we had no tractors or
anything like that, so everything was horse power\! \laughs.\ I have
three brothers and three sisters, and we had a pony who was half
Shetland and half Pacer, so I grew up on a horse.

I went to a little one-room school, the Jennings School (which was my
maiden name), and then when it came time to go to high school . . .
Actually, for my brothers and sisters, there were no buses, so my
brothers and sisters stayed in Stanberry during the week, the town where
there was a high school; and in fact, my two older brothers and sister
actually once had an apartment, one year, by themselves\! I mean, these
three kids lived in an apartment in town so they could go to school. But
when Roosevelt came in and the farm-to-market roads were built, then
there was a gravel road built from Stanberry to Alanthus, which is a
little town of 104\. Back in those days there were towns about every
five miles—maybe greater than that, but in any case, it was about two
miles from where I lived; and the bus came to Alanthus, so the question
was how to get to the bus. Well, the first year I stayed with my sister
in town and came home on weekends, and then after that I took the bus. I
started driving a car when I was fourteen. My father, who was a farmer
and a school teacher, said to me one day, “Can you drive a car?” I said
“Yes,” because my older brothers had let me drive once in a while. So
he said, “Okay\! Get in that car and back it up\!” So I got in the car,
and I put it in reverse, and I killed the engine—man, I did everything
in the world\!—but finally I got it backed up. And I got out of the car
and he said, “Well, I see you can drive\!” \laughs.\ So the next day,
I drove the car to meet the bus. They didn’t let me drive out on the
highway, just on the back roads, the country roads, because I was only
fourteen.

Anyway, I had three brothers and three sisters, and my grandmother, who
was a strong influence on my life, lived about a mile and a half away. I
went to see my grandmother every day; I rode my pony over. We were so
poor that we couldn’t afford a subscription to a newspaper, but she took
the Saint Joseph Newspress, and we used to go down every day and pick
the newspaper up after she’d read it. I’m sure she hadn’t read it all,
most times \laughs\, but she gave it to us anyway. She took the Kansas
City Star, which was a weekly paper, and she said, “Well, if it’s
important, it’ll be in the weekly newspaper.” \laughs.\ “And I read
that thoroughly\!” she said.

We lived in a little four-room house: we had a boys’ room and a girls’
room and a kitchen, and then the living room, and my parents had a
folding-up bed that was in the living room. My oldest sister was the
cook, my second sister cleaned the house, and I was the third daughter,
without household duties, so I always worked in the field, and helped
with raking and plowing and all that kind of stuff. We, of course, had
cows to milk, and things like that, so we always had chores to do, and
animals to feed, and things like that. My kids think it’s bliss—the
Waltons or something, in Missouri—but believe me, it wasn’t the
Waltons\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Did you have an idea about what you wanted to do when you grew up?

**Bartik:**

Yes. I shouldn’t say this, but: Get the hell out of Missouri\!
\laughs.\ No; well, I grew up with seeing these farm women and seeing
these kids—seeing these farm women with these gross husbands, farm
husbands, and they were saying, “Oh, well, my husband won’t let me do
such-and-such,” and little kids hanging on their skirts. So I took off,
and I decided: one, I was not going to get married, and two, I was not
having any children. I had an aunt Gretchen, who was my maiden aunt, and
she had left Missouri, and she taught in Illinois and various places,
and Cleveland, Ohio. She came home in the summer, and she had Hanmacher
suits, and wore jewelry, and all that stuff. I wanted to be like Aunt
Gretchen. I wasn’t going to get married, and I wasn’t having any
children. I was going to do something outside Missouri—because I did
read a lot, so I knew there was a lot out there in the world that I
didn’t know anything about, and I wanted to see it\!

**Abbate:**

Were you interested in math and science as a child?

**Bartik:**

Well, all my family was good in math, except my sister, who actually
went to school during the most “progressive” of progressive education.
We were all good at math, even my mother. I was especially good in math,
and it was like a game: you know, there wasn’t really anything serious
about it. Well, I skipped fifth grade. In those little one-room schools,
they had fifth-and-sixth and seventh-and-eighth grades together, and
then had individual grades for one, two, three, four. The year that I
was in fifth grade, they were giving the sixth grade courses, so the
teacher said, “Well, if you do sixth grade math, you can go into the
seventh grade.” I was the only one, actually, in the fifth grade,
although there were three or four in the sixth grade, and so that’s what
I did. But I never really thought about math as any kind of career.

Actually, my first recognition came from being a softball pitcher\! I
was a good softball pitcher. We used to run around to the other towns.
We’d form a team and we’d go in by trucks and play other teams from
other little towns. So every summer, the coach would come up and ask my
dad if I could play softball again, and I did. Actually, I got so good I
got paid like two dollars for pitching a game—which is a lot of money,
back in those days\! I mean, when I was in college, I worked for forty
cents an hour; so it was a lot of money, two dollars. Anyway, we used to
go around, and actually I pitched one no-hit, no-run game. When I’d go
down to this town in Stanberry, people would stop and talk to me, and
tell me what I did wrong, what I should do next time, and what I did
right\! So that was the first time I ever had any recognition. And I did
that until I got interested in boys, and I could play better ball better
than they did, so I finally decided not to play\! I could throw the ball
harder than my brothers, actually.

But I used to practice a lot. I had a little tin can that I flattened
out and put on the door of one of the sheds, and I used to practice
pitching. I mean, I didn’t practice hours a day—don’t get me wrong—but I
would practice an hour or two a day during ball season; I mean, I took
this sort of seriously. Then when I was in high school, my brother was
going to be a doctor, he said, so I wanted to be a nurse, because he was
at that time my favorite brother. So I thought I’d be a nurse. Then,
when I was in high school, he said, “Oh, well, you really should study
Latin, because so many of the medical terms are in Latin.” So my English
teacher said, “Gee, I’d had Latin one time; I’d like to review it; why
don’t we get together at night and we’ll do Latin?” So I would go over
one night a week and we would study Latin. When I was in high school, I
was editor of our school newspaper. We didn’t have a newspaper, but we
had a section of the Stanberry Headlight. They printed all the high
school news, and I was the editor of that. This gave me the idea of
being a writer. So when I went to college, I started out as
pre-journalism.

\

### College Years

**Abbate:**

You went to the Northwest Missouri State Teachers College. Was that sort
of an obvious choice, or how did you end up going there?

**Bartik:**

Well, it was because it was so cheap\! I mean, we paid $18\.75—eighteen
dollars and seventy-five cents—for a quarter. And it was close; it was
less than thirty miles from home. So it was the obvious place. Missouri
was pretty forward-looking in that they set up five State Teachers
Colleges in the state: one in each corner and one in the middle. Iowa
and Kansas didn’t have them, and half of our student body was from Iowa,
rather than just Missouri. I think they paid more, being from out of
state, because I’m sure this was the state-subsidized school. My Aunt
Gretchen loaned us $25 a month to go to college, for two years. So she
loaned me the money, and I worked in the bookstore. Between those two
things, there was enough money. I lived in a light housekeeping room in
a private home called Holt House I’d say about fourteen people lived
there. It was two dollars a week, I think. Anyway, the amount that I
earned, and the amount that Aunt Gretchen loaned me, saw me through two
years of college.

So, I was taking pre-journalism, but I couldn’t stand my advisor. Her
name was Mattie Dykes. Well, to sort of understand: My brother Bob, this
one that was going to be a doctor, was a brown-noser of the first order,
and all his teachers loved him, including Mattie Dykes. So I did not
measure up to brother Bob, because I didn’t have the same charm. It was
unbelievable; but he had other old women teachers who thought he was
super. I couldn’t stand Mattie Dykes. Furthermore, I realized I could
never get the money to go to the University of Missouri, which had a
great journalism school. I decided I’d better be realistic, so I
switched to a math major with a minor in English, and that’s how I did
it.

**Abbate:**

And you switched to math thinking that you would teach math?

**Bartik:**

No. I’d get a degree and then I would do something else\! \laughs.\ I
didn’t know what I was going to do, but I wasn’t going to teach.

**Abbate:**

I was wondering why math seemed more realistic.

**Bartik:**

Because it was easy. And if I majored in English, I couldn’t think of
anything to do but teach school. I liked English, and I liked science,
but I had no idea what I would do.

**Abbate:**

But math seemed like something that could be useful for a job.

**Bartik:**

Well, yes, and it was something I could do. I mean, as a last resort I
supposed I could teach. I realized I wouldn’t be jobless, but it
certainly wasn’t anything I would do with any enthusiasm. Everybody in
my family were teachers: my father was a teacher; my grandmother had
been a teacher; my sisters were teachers; uncles; aunts. So it just
wasn’t something that I was interested in, actually.

When I was in college, of course I was the only math major in my class.
And I took courses with the sailors—because I was a freshman when Pearl
Harbor was bombed. The boys were cleaned right out of school, because
they all were drafted and went into some branch of the military. My
older brother was there. They had started a flight program in Maryville,
the same place where the college was, so he took courses at the college
and took flight lessons. Everybody was all bound up in the war. The next
year they got these Navy programs, the V-5 and V-12: one of them was for
recruits who were just getting into the Navy, and the other was for guys
who had been at sea. They had brought them back for the beginning of
officers’ training. I was actually a sophomore when I started taking the
math courses: analytic geometry, trigonometry, physics, and courses like
that. These were courses I took with these sailors. All the sailors knew
me, because I was the only woman in the class. I also worked in the
bookstore, which had a little coffee shop attached to it, so I knew most
of the kids in school. I knew most of the sailors because of these
circumstances. They were all very nice to me, actually, and I made lots
of friends.

College was a fabulous experience\! I was 16 when I went off to college.
I just saw in the alumni magazine that one of my roommates had died, and
a memoriam was held for her. When I went to college I had a roommate who
was a freshman, named Joyce Cox. She was really the prettiest girl in
school. We had two juniors as roommates, because there were two rooms
set up, so we slept in one and studied in the other one. There were four
of us in these two rooms; and these juniors were really nice to us.
Although I was emotionally not more than a sixteen-year-old—I’d never
actually been anywhere or done anything particularly—they were very nice
to me. I was, the way many freshman are, shocked at things that they’d
say and ideas which I’d never even heard of before. In fact, one of the
teachers that I still consider one of the most influential in my life
was named Dr. Horsfal. I took his course in biology. I was always a very
good student, but I could not fathom how to take his tests. He gave us
vocabulary tests every day—or maybe there weren’t every day, but it
seemed like every day; it was more than once a week—and I could never
get the definitions right. You see, he wouldn’t accept a dictionary
definition; he wouldn’t accept the definition in the book; and he
wouldn’t accept one from context. Now, I could never figure out what
the definition ought to be, and I kept flunking these tests\! This was
the first time in my life I’d ever flunked a test. So, came mid-term, I
got a pink slip in biology, which was almost unheard-of; and then I got
an honor in Phys. Ed. The Phys. Ed. Department wanted me to major in
Phys. Ed. because I was a good athlete\! I liked to take Phys. Ed.
courses. Most college students try to get out of Phys. Ed. as much as
possible, but I didn’t try to get out of it; I mean, I took them even
after I didn’t have to. Anyway, my brothers teased me about being brawny
but not brainy\! But I wrote to my mother and I said, “You know, mom,
I’m really sorry about this, and I assure you that I will pass this
course. I haven’t been working as hard as I ought to.” I got this nice
letter back from my mother, saying, “We know you’ll pass the course\! We
know you’re a good student.” I mean, it was just wonderful—and it’s
always worked with me. Do the opposite. Don’t bawl me out, but tell me
how you trust me, and God, I’ll do anything for you. So my mother never
bawled me out. She always worked in the opposite direction.

Anyway, I did pass the biology course. But later, when I was working on
the UNIVAC(UNIVAC "UNIVAC"), I took a computer course at Penn, and
this teacher, for some reason or another, tried to compare computers to
semantics, and he brought out the Count Korzybski, who is a semanticist
and wrote a book called Science and Sanity. Count Korzybski said that
people go insane partly due to their confusion over the definition of
words\! You know the old Aristotelian view of two-valued logic: “Well,”
he said, “that isn’t the way words are.” If you describe a particular
horse you see, and then you see a pony, it wouldn’t fit that
description. But if you saw a pony and described that, then it wouldn’t
fit with the other one\! And if you just put their characteristics that
were in common, then you’d see a horse and you’d say, “Hmm\! Cripes,
this horse is a lot more than this definition\!” Anyway, he said people
became confused because their words were either underdefined or
overdefined—and all of sudden it hit me: Horsfal had read Count
Korzybski, and that’s what he was trying to teach us\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

To keep you from going insane\! \both laugh.\

**Bartik:**

Well, I mean, ideas like that: I’m sure most college kids feel the same,
but I just felt this was outrageous.

**Abbate:**

Were the other students having the same trouble?

**Bartik:**

Oh lord, yes\! We fought over it—the whole class was one big fight\! In
particular we had one very bright guy. I was not a fighter at that time,
you have to understand. I just sat there and listened; but this guy
fought every day with the teacher. He believed that contextual
definitions were the real ones; that when you’re reading something for
the definition, it had to be contextual—so then they fought back and
forth.

I found Horsfal very interesting when we discussed sex. When the sexual
part of biology came up, he said, “I know you have lots of questions,
and you’re probably too embarrassed to ask them. I’ll put a box outside
my office, and any question you have about sex, just put the question in
the box and I will answer the questions.” Well\! This was the first time
I’d ever heard of anything like this\! \laughs.\ There was a question
of “Why not sex during menstruation?” and “Why not sex every time you go
out with someone?”—I mean, there were all kinds of sexual questions. And
you can imagine what college kids said\! He stood up there—I’ll never
forget this—he stood up there with his back to the blackboard, standing
there answering every question\! I mean, that was very impressive\! Very
impressive.

But anyway, I had a wonderful time. When my two years were up and my
money from my aunt was running out, my father said to me—my brothers
were away in the service, of course, and he didn’t have anybody to help
him on the farm—so he said if I would help him on the farm, he would
send me to school in style the next year. So that’s what I did. The
summer before my junior year, I worked on the farm. It was actually one
of the best experiences of my life. With seven children—and my father
was a schoolteacher and a farmer—I had never had any time alone with my
father. I basically didn’t know my father that well. I’d never been
close to him; I never really knew what he thought, and things like that.
I worked with him all summer, out in the fields. We ate our lunch out in
the field, and I was with him all the time. I really got to know my
father, which was a big plus, and I enjoyed it very much, actually.

\

### A Father's Influence

**Abbate:**

What was he like?

**Bartik:**

He was very sentimental. He was not any taller than I am; I’ll show you
pictures of him. He was very sentimental, very hard-working, and loved
his children beyond anything in the world. That was one thing we always
knew. You can’t believe how hard it was for my parents to send all of us
kids to high school. Most of the farm kids didn’t even go to high
school. I had a girl in my class who was every bit as bright as I am in
everything but math, who didn’t even go to high school. But with our
family—I mean, times were hard\! There was no money. So my father
\voice chokes\—they burned wood in the stove, and my father, on
Saturday, would have a load of wood to take nine miles with horses\! I
mean, he taught school, and he worked, and chopped up that wood and took
it down there. To this day I just think, “Oh my God\! Would I ever have
done anything like that?” And then my mother, of course, all weekend
cooked food to send with them, so they’d have food to eat during the
week; she’d bake cakes and bake bread and all that stuff.

He was very volatile. He had a very volatile temper, and it scared me
half to death. So it left damage, the rages he’d go into. But, the one
thing about my father that spoiled me in many ways: he always made
amends. When he perceived that he’d hurt somebody—and that included his
children—he made amends. So, even though he had this violent temper,
which was very frightening, he never lost it with me that summer.
Actually, he was very loved by all of his school children; they used to
run up to him and hold his hands and all that stuff—but I never did: I
never touched my father, when I was little. One of my second cousins—or
maybe third cousins—lived in Albany, and he used to come to a farm of my
cousins’. When they were threshing and things like that, everybody was
working. This kid was a big fat kid and very weak, and so Dad would take
him and they would take the grain from the thresher and put it back in
the granary. This kid told me when he was in college—and by this time he
had lost weight and he was a very attractive young man—but he said, “You
know, your father was the most wonderful thing that ever happened to
me\!” He said, “He worked with me,” and he said he’d called him “honey
dear”—and my father did; I mean, he used a lot of endearing phrases. And
so he said, “Imagine this: here I am this big fat kid; my own father was
dead; I’d never been around men very much in my life, and there I am
working with this guy, and he’s calling me ‘honey dear’\!” \laughs.\
But people talked to Dad, young people, because he was a school teacher;
and so many of them, when they got in trouble or anything, would come
talk to him. Plus, he was the representative of the community when they
had to go outside, like for state programs, or stuff like that.

Now, my father never got a degree; he only went to the normal school. In
this little town of Stanberry, right after high school, he went to
normal school that summer, and taught school that fall. So he was
seventeen when he started teaching school\! Some of the students—because
the boys, when they didn’t have anything to do, would keep going to
school, even after they were graduated from eighth grade—so some of
those kids were older than he was. And all the time, he always had to
take extension courses and things like that to keep being certified,
because he never went back to Maryville to get a degree.

The one thing, of course, was that the farmers were all male chauvinist
pigs. They used to pay the girls, when we’d work with the boys later on
in life, less than the boys. They’d pay the boys a dollar-fifty a day,
and they’d pay me and my sister fifty cents\!

**Abbate:**

For farm work?

**Bartik:**

Hoeing is what we were doing: hoeing corn.

And my aunt: I used to work all day for her, and she’d give me ten
cents\! I never had much love for her, to tell you the truth. When I
used to go down to my grandmother’s house, she would say, “You know, I
think there’re some eggs up in the hay loft that I can’t get to. Would
you go get them for me?” So I would go around and gather the eggs, and
she would give me ten cents just for bringing these eggs in. But I think
that’s a little different than working in a garden all day for ten
cents\!

My father was fabulous. We thought he was the bravest man in the world,
and we knew he would die for us. One time, my brothers and sisters and I
were going down to Grandma’s house. There were about five of us, I
guess, so three of them got on Beauty, the pony, and my oldest sister
got the riding horse that Dad rode. His name was King. King was an
ex-race horse. He had big long legs and he was almost white, gray and
white. King was perfectly peaceful and everything was fine, except if
you were riding him and a horse came running up behind him. He would
think he was in a race, and he would take off like a rocket\! So we were
riding toward my grandmother’s house, and we were just walking along,
but of course King had big long legs and Beauty was a pony, so they kept
dropping behind. They’d kick Beauty in the ribs, and they came running
up behind King. He took off like a rocket. \laughs.\ I just saw this
place; I was back there where this happened. There was a little hill,
and at the top of the hill there was a cemetery to the left, and then
there was a big long hill. At the bottom of the hill, there were two
fields. My father was working in one of those fields, and he saw us come
over the hill. He knew exactly what happened. He knew King was running
off\! He left what he was doing, ran out in the road, and stopped that
horse\! He realized there was a sharp turn in the road, and there was a
barbed wire fence beside the road. He realized that King would not make
it around the turn and would rip our legs with the wire. Or, maybe he
would make the turn, and we would go flying off onto the wire. Anyway,
he got there in time. To this day I don’t know how he could have stopped
that horse, but he did. King reared up when he stopped, and I fell off.
It knocked me unconscious. My sister didn’t fall off the horse, but she
did rip her leg on the saddle. We thought Dad was the bravest—and I
still do think he was about as brave as anybody I know\! And he
certainly loved us; we never, never doubted that; but he did have temper
tantrums that were a sight to behold.

**Abbate:**

So you worked for him for that summer.

**Bartik:**

The next year, he said, “Well, you’re too expensive for me.” The next
summer I went to Kansas City and I worked in a defense plant. I did
silver plating of a gear that fit behind the propeller of a Pratt and
Whitney airplane engine.

\recording pauses\

\Bartnik is showing Abbate various photos of her family. The first
shows Bartik in a softball uniform.\

**Bartik:**

When I played softball, the merchants in town would sponsor us. I was
always sponsored by my brother-in-law, who had a feed and seed store. My
uniform read “Alldredge Feed and Seed” across the back.

\another photo:\ Here’s my father, with two of his grandchildren.

**Abbate:**

He looks like you.

**Bartik:**

\another photo:\ That’s my mother, when she was in her nineties. She
lived to be almost a hundred and two. She was a fabulous psychologist\!

\another photo:\ There’s another one when we wore short pants.

**Abbate:**

Oh, the softball outfit.

**Bartik:**

Softball outfits, yes.

**Abbate:**

Did you see any of the women’s softball teams that played during the
war?

**Bartik:**

No, but I saw “A League of Their Own,” which I loved\!

**Abbate:**

The film.

**Bartik:**

Oh, yes, I loved that film\! In fact, that’s what Kathryn Kleiman is
hoping, that somebody will make a movie of the ENIAC women. I don’t know
if they ever will.

\another photo:\ This is a terrible picture . . . That’s my mother and
father.

The reason all these things are out is because I was taking all of these
pictures back for the reunion. While we were all there, we were looking
at all these old pictures.

\another photo:\ Those were three of my brothers and my mother—I think
that was her ninetieth birthday. We had a big party for her.

\more photos:\ These are all the Jennings family. We go back in the
Jennings clan; they’ve traced it back to the 1500s in England. They were
in North Carolina and Virginia, and then they came to Kentucky. They
were in Kentucky, but they really were Northern sympathizers, and the
Civil War was being fought over their land, so they went to Texas. Then
they came back to Missouri. My grandfather’s father died in Texas, but
my grandfather’s mother and her children came back to Missouri. They did
not homestead: they bought land. It was a dollar an acre, or something
like that. So that’s how they got to Missouri.

\

### Graduating College and Leaving Missouri

**Abbate:**

All right; but we were talking about how you got out of Missouri.

**Bartik:**

Yes. So, I was in Kansas City. During the war, although the college used
to be on the quarter system, they went on the semester system. In the
fall they had a short term called “intersession”—but everybody else
called it “intercourse.” \laughs\ I needed twenty-four credits to
graduate, and most of them were education courses, which I considered
gut courses. I figured I could graduate in one semester. I actually
worked during the intersession and didn’t come back until about October.
When I came in to the school to register, and they said I’d have to go
see the Dean. His name was Dean Jones. I came into his office, and he
said, “What makes you think you can graduate?” So I said I only needed
twenty-four credits. Sixteen credits was considered a normal load. In
any case, I said, “Most of these courses are pretty easy, and I only
need two math courses.” So he said, “We don’t even give those math
courses\! You can’t graduate.” It was ridiculous\! I was crying, and I
ran up to Dr. Hake, who was my advisor and also head of the Math
Department. Her and Dr. Horsfal were sitting there. I was crying like
mad and told them that Dean Jones said that I couldn’t graduate, and
that you didn’t give the math courses. Dr. Hake pulled himself up and he
said, “Well, I happen to be head of this Math Department. We can hardly
offer a degree in math if we don’t give the courses. Since you’re the
only math major, we’ll just arrange those courses for your convenience.”
So that’s exactly what he did\! He took retired teachers to teach the
courses. One was Colbert, who had taught my father, the summer he was in
school many years before\! The other one was named Helwig. Helwig taught
modern geometry, and Colbert taught theory of numbers. That’s the first
time I had heard of the binary number system, when I was a senior in
college. \laughs.\ I’d never even thought about that kind of stuff.
Now I understand they teach it in first grade, but I’d never even
thought about it.

My calculus teacher for a long time had taught my brother Bob. He had
been one of her favorites, and I never quite measured up to my brother
Bob. A student from South America and I took calculus and advanced
calculus with this woman. Her name was Dr. Lane. She knew I did not want
to teach school, so she came in with job advertisements. One was to work
for IBM as a systems service girl—which I did apply for, actually—and
one for Aberdeen Proving Grounds, to be a “computer.” She had these ads
from math societies she belonged to. They were recruiting, and Aberdeen
was recruiting women math majors, because the men were all away, and
most math majors were men.

She had worked for Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio. She
said, “Go to Penn. They have a differential analyzer\!” She said there
were only three in the world. That wasn’t true; but anyway, she said
there was one at Dayton, at the Air Force Base there; and there was one
at Penn; and there was one at MIT, where Vannevar Bush had invented it.
That wasn’t quite true: Aberdeen had one; I think someplace else had
one. But anyway, she said, “Go there, because there’s a differential
analyzer.” So I applied. I also applied for IBM, and I wasn’t hired as a
Systems Service girl. In fact, I probably wouldn’t have gone, because
one of the girls that was hired wrote back that it was horrible: that
they expect you to dress like mad, but they don’t pay enough money, and
you’re expected to live in the New York area, which is very expensive,
et cetera. And she said you work like a dog\! So it wasn’t that
appealing.

But anyway, everybody was trying to get me to teach school—the college
and my father, I mean—because they really needed math teachers. I went
back home and said I was waiting for a response from Aberdeen, every day
my father would come home and say that somebody else had told him how
they needed math teachers. So I sat there, and finally I got a telegram,
saying, “Come as soon as possible\!” I was on the Wabash out of
Stanberry the next night\! I was hired as a computer.

\Looking through papers:\ Somewhere I have that paper . . .

**Abbate:**

Oh, really—that telegram?

**Bartik:**

Yes. Not the telegram—well, the letter that confirmed the telegram. Yes,
I do have it.

\

### Reflections on ENIAC and Beginning of Career at Aberdeen

**Bartik:**

\Pulls out a copy of ENIAC by Scott McCartney .\ Have you seen this
book, by the way?

**Abbate:**

I don’t think I actually have.

**Bartik:**

That’s the best book that’s —I mean, there are a lot of things wrong
with it, but it still is the best book out so far, on the subject.

**Abbate:**

But you think this is fairly accurate, this ENIAC book?

**Bartik:**

Well, it’s not accurate about the BINAC; and the other thing that pisses
me off about him . . .

\Pulls out pictures:\ That’s the ENIAC. This is the BINAC; that was a
successor.

Here’s a picture of Pres Eckert \J. Presper Eckert\. And John Mauchly
gave me away when I got married\!

**Abbate:**

Ah, I didn’t know that.

**Bartik:**

Here it is. Here’s the paper.

**Abbate:**

So this says it’s a promotion from Computer to Mathematician.

**Bartik:**

Oh, it is? Excuse me, I got the wrong one, then. I do have it . . .

**Abbate:**

I’m curious about that, though. So that’s when you switched from . . .

**Bartik:**

That’s when they made us professionals\! We were called
sub-professionals up to then.

**Abbate:**

This was January 1946\. \Looking at document.\ So you started out at
$2,000 a year in March ‘45 . . .

**Bartik:**

Right.

**Abbate:**

And you’d been getting $2,320 per year from January 1946 . . .

**Bartik:**

That’s because we worked six days a week.

**Abbate:**

And then they were going to promote you to $2,980 per year from a
“Computer” to a “Mathematician.”

**Bartik:**

Yes. \Shows letter confirming her initial job offer.\

**Abbate:**

I think I’ve seen this one, the first one; but I don’t think I ever saw
the promotion one.

**Bartik:**

Well, that “S.P.” meant “sub-professional.”

**Abbate:**

Oh, I see: so you went from SP-6 to P-2\.

**Bartik:**

Now the men had professional ratings, but they didn’t give them to
women.

So, anyway: This is the one of the articles from the Wall Street
Journal. Here’s a copy. There were two of them, on two succeeding weeks.

\

### Building Relationships: The Women of ENIAC and Aberdeen

**Bartik:**

Now, I’m curious if your friends \at IBM\ didn’t talk about [Betty
Holberton(Betty_Holberton "Betty Holberton"), Betty Snyder Holberton,
because she was very instrumental in FORTRAN(FORTRAN "FORTRAN"). And
also COBOL—which Grace Hopper never gave her credit for, but she was\!

**Abbate:**

I don’t know about Grace Hopper giving her credit for it, but certainly
other people have.

**Bartik:**

Yes. Well, Grace did say that Betty was the greatest programmer she ever
met. Betty said, yeah, that’s because she found there was a mistake in
Grace’s program that Grace couldn’t find\! \laughs.\ She didn’t take
it too seriously.

But Betty continued her career, you know. She had a long, long career,
particularly in the standardizing of FORTRAN. She traveled all over the
world for it. She’s had a stroke, and her memory’s not that reliable
now, and she has a hard time communicating now. One of the things that
they tell me about intelligent people: If they have a stroke, and they
lose part of their memory, they tend to fill it in. For example—she
always tells me I’m wrong on this, but there’s no way I could be wrong
on this—anyway, when she and I were asked to do the test programs for
the ENIAC for the first demonstration, Adele and Herman Goldstine
invited us over to their apartment. Now she’s always telling me it was
in the summer and the cat was all over us, but it wasn’t in the summer;
I mean, it was like two weeks before the demonstration, and the
demonstration was in February: February the 14th. So she said, “Oh, you
just don’t remember it\!” And she argues about these things, and I say
to her, “Betty, it couldn’t have been, because, they asked us just
before the demonstration\!” It’s a shame, but her memory’s not reliable
about what happened. I mean, somewhere she said, “Oh, we were just so
tired from lifting those trays, and doing those cables.” Well, that was
ridiculous\! \laughs.\ I mean, they were little trays, and you’d set
them up once, and maybe it’d take you five minutes\! Nobody was
exhausted from lifting those trays. I mean, it was very ridiculous\! But
anyway, that’s why it’s a shame that the story wasn’t told sooner,
because people die, and forget; things happen to them.

So: I came to Philadelphia, and I used a Monroe calculator to calculate
trajectories.

**Abbate:**

I should clarify: You were officially working for Aberdeen, but they had
you posted at Penn.

**Bartik:**

Right\! One of the things, when they built the differential analyzer,
was that the stipulation was that in wartime, or an emergency need, that
the differential analyzer would be at the disposal of Aberdeen. So the
people that ran the differential analyzer—and they had well over a
hundred people using hand calculators; the group I was in had about
seventy of them, but there was another group with more—that’s what they
were doing. Everybody was calculating trajectories for firing tables for
guns.

Well, I got there at the end of March. I was there April, May, and then
in June they sent a piece of paper around saying they were looking for
programmers for the ENIAC. We didn’t know anything about what the ENIAC
was, and never saw it or anything; and I didn’t know that they’d already
picked all but one. They picked the two people that ran the differential
analyzer, because they already had experience with that kind of a thing;
and then Betty Holberton—they had her on many of their new projects; and
then these two other girls: Marlyn supposedly never made a mistake in
her calculations, and the other one was a young girl from Hunter
College—she was a little older than me, but not much. So they were
already picked, but nobody knew that. There were about thirteen of us
that applied for the job, and I was not picked; I was second alternate.
The first one that was picked had a very nice apartment in West
Philadelphia; and housing was very bad, and Aberdeen was a hellhole as
far as everybody was concerned—because people had been down there; I
mean, it’s just a bare Army base—so she decided that she wasn’t going to
take it. At that time, they knew that ENIAC was going to go to Aberdeen,
so she decided not to take it. Then the first alternate—she also was
from Missouri, by the way—was away on vacation. So they called her and
told her she’d have to come back to go to Aberdeen the next week—to
study punch-card equipment, was actually what we went down there for—so
she decided she didn’t want to cut short her vacation. Also, she knew
Aberdeen was a hellhole\! Well, they called me in on Friday afternoon
and said, “Can you be ready to go to Aberdeen on Monday?” I said, “You
bet\!”

They’d brought about five or six women math majors from different
colleges to Philadelphia, and we had run around together and everything,
and three of them were living in a crowded apartment, so one of them was
delighted to take over my apartment while I was gone. So there I was.
Monday morning, I jumped on the train, and they were all saying, “Where
did she come from?” \laughs.\ They didn’t even know me; I hadn’t been
there very long\! “God, where did they get her?”

**Abbate:**

You mean the other . . .

**Bartik:**

The other programmers\! Because they were on the train, too. They hadn’t
met me either.

**Abbate:**

Why were you so eager to go?

**Bartik:**

It was something new\! I mean, I didn’t know what it was, but I knew
that it was boring sitting there and pounding the calculator, and
\this\ was something new. And I always believed that I could do
anything as well as anybody else, if I were on an even footing.
Basically, from my career point of view, I thought, “Geez, I’m never
going to get anywhere. They’ve been doing this for four or five years\!
I’m going to be sitting there, running this little calculator.” But I
figured if I was on a new project, that I could do as well as anybody.
So it was the fact that it was new. And Aberdeen wasn’t a hell-hole to
me; I’d never been there. What did it mean to me?

Actually, they were fabulous with me, those girls\! Betty was a Quaker,
and lived in Narberth; and Kay was born in Ireland, and was Irish, and
lived in Chestnut Hill; and Ruth went to Hunter College, and lived at
Far Rockaway Beach; and Marlyn actually was in accounting—she did not
have a math major—and she was from Philadelphia. So Ruth said, “I get to
show her New York\!” Because I couldn’t wait\! I mean, I couldn’t
imagine people living here and never going to New York or Washington or
anyplace like that. Well, I couldn’t wait, because I’d read all these
books, and I had all these fantasies about what I would do. I would eat
lobster—you know, I’d never even seen a lobster in my life\! \laughs.\
I mean, all of these things that I’d read in books about how people ate
lobsters. Anyway, Ruth took me to New York, and it was really a fabulous
sight to come in on the train and to see the Empire State Building and
the skyline of New York for the first time. We came in, and I had a
fantasy of putting my foot on the brass rail and having a drink, so we
went right from the train and she took me over to the Brass Rail
Restaurant, and I put my foot on the rail and sat there and had a
drink\! \laughs.\ And then we went to Radio City Music Hall to see the
show, and to see a movie, and she was leaning over in her seat watching
me when that stage came up \laughs\—she expected me to flip out—and my
eyes I guess were pretty big, as I saw that. So then we got on the
subway—and the New York subway, of course, I’d heard about all my
life—and rode for an hour to Far Rockaway. You can’t believe that
people say they live in New York and then get on the subway and ride for
an hour\! \laughs.\ But anyway, we went to Far Rockaway; that’s where
her parents lived, so we stayed there for the weekend. That was
fabulous. And then Marlyn said, “Well, you got to show her New York; I
get to show her Washington\!” So she and I went down to Washington one
weekend. And, again, coming in on the train and seeing the Capitol for
the first time was really fabulous. So we went to, you know, all the
places: the Lincoln Memorial, and the Jefferson Memorial, and the
Washington Monument. We went all over the place, and it was fabulous\!

And then Kay took me home with her, one weekend. I didn’t have any place
to go, because my apartment was taken up, and I didn’t have any
relatives anywhere. Of course, we worked six days a week, so you were
only off one day; but they normally went home. So Kay invited me one
weekend with her family. Well, when she got there she began to speak
with a Gaelic accent; I couldn’t understand a word anybody said\!
\laughs.\ It was really very funny. She had a bunch of brothers and
sisters. In fact, she was born in Ireland. Her father came here and was
a stonemason apprentice with John B. Kelly—Grace Kelly’s father. He was
here, I guess, for four years, and then he went home and had some land,
and he was going to build a house. So he decided that he was going to
marry Kay’s mother, which he did, and he built this house. When Kay and
I were there, we went to see the house; it was still in the family. They
were there, and he was very active in the I.R.A.—and John B. Kelly also
was very interested in Ireland and raised a lot of money for the
rebellion, so one of the things that I think that Kay’s father did was
to take money back \to Ireland\ that they had raised through John B.
Kelly. So he was there and farming, and they blew up a bridge one night
(or one day), and all the others ran away and hid, but he came home
because his wife was having a baby—it turned out to be Kay. So he came
home, and they arrested him at home, and they took him off to prison,
and he was in prison for two years in solitary confinement. Once he got
out of prison, then I guess he decided to come to the United States, so
he came back and worked for John B. Kelly for the rest of his working
life.

Betty took me home to her family. Her father was an astronomer and a
teacher. They treated me like their child; I mean, it was absolutely
fabulous\! When we were in Philadelphia I used to spend a couple nights
a week with her family, and then if my roommate was gone, she came and
spent the night with me down in my apartment. We were almost
inseparable. We worked together. She was older than I, but I really
loved to work with her. She was a very logical, very hard-working—of
course, we all worked hard.

I’m getting this story crooked\! Anyway, we went to Aberdeen, and we
learned how to wire up those boards for the punch-card machines—because
the input of the ENIAC was a card reader, and the output was a card
punch; and our printer was a tabulator. We had a sorter and a key-punch
and a collator, and a few other things; and we had to wire up the boards
to do whatever we wanted to do. We were down there for two months, and
then we came back, in August, and nobody had anything for us. There were
no plans. We didn’t even have a room; we all had to go around scrounging
for rooms. I don’t know where Kay was, and I don’t know where the others
were, but Betty and I just took a classroom at the Moore School. They
gave us these great big block diagrams of the ENIAC, and we were
supposed to sit down and find out how the ENIAC worked. It was hot—it
was August—and humid; and they were putting a third floor on the Moore
School, so the jackhammers were going; I mean, it was terrible. So we
were sitting there, trying to figure out how the accumulator worked, and
this man walked in the classroom. He looked all around at the ceiling,
and we didn’t know who he was. He said, “Well, I was just checking to
see if the ceiling was coming down in here.” And then he said, “I’m John
Mauchly.” We said, “Oh my God, are we glad to meet you\!” \laughs.\
We’d never met him before. We said, “Oh, boy, are we hung up on this
accumulator\! We can’t figure out how it works.” So he came over and
helped us figure it out. He said, “Well, look, my office is right next
door. When you have any problems, you can come in and I’ll help you\!”
So we began to save up our problems, and in the afternoon, if he was
there, we would go in and ask him all our questions. So that’s how we
learned how to program the ENIAC.

Then, when the students came back in September, they did give us a room
where we were all together, finally. John Holberton was our manager, and
then Dr. Dederick came up from Aberdeen to supervise the whole megillah.

\

### Understanding ENIAC

**Abbate:**

What was it like trying to figure out the ENIAC? You just had diagrams
of the logic circuits?

**Bartik:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

And you were trying to figure out how to actually make it do something.

**Bartik:**

Well, it isn’t as bad as it might seem, because all of us had had
experience on the calculators. John Mauchly at one time described this
as though you had hooked together twenty calculators, because he had
twenty accumulators, and that’s basically what an accumulator was. But
we had to worry about the switch settings, and how you got it to do what
you wanted, and it had digit trays and program signals. If you can think
of it, to some extent, like these calculators, then you can understand
how we figured it out. This was a decimal system; it was not a binary
system. You hooked these accumulators together; you could tell this one
to send, and this one to receive—well, you’d tell it to add or subtract,
because if you told it to subtract, it would send out the nines
complement, and then the other one you would just put “receive” and it
would come in and add or subtract or whatever; but it was based on the
sending unit. And you had to hook up digit trays, so the digits would
have something to run on, and you could use more than one digit tray.
However, if you sent digits out along those trays, you had to make sure
that it didn’t cross circuits with some other unit sending something on
those trays. In other words, you could add and subtract between two
accumulators, and add and subtract between two more, but they couldn’t
use the same digit trays.

**Abbate:**

Now, a digit tray is a communications link?

**Bartik:**

It’s nothing but a memory bus. From a computer today, it’s a memory bus.
And then the program trays were like the program counter, except we
didn’t have a program counter. You would do an instruction, and you
had this switch on the machine where you would tell it what to do, but
you had a program input and a program output. So now let’s suppose you
had a signal, A-1, and you want two accumulators \to add\—A to add to
B and C to add to D: then you would use the same program signal to
signal them all, and you had this tray that went around—it was called a
“program tray”—and we labeled each of these little outlets, and it was
just a wire running between these two things; that’s all it was. So you
would send a signal out from the last operation, and then you would pick
it off every place you wanted to stimulate the next operation to occur.
You would take the output of the longest operation. For example, you
could add and subtract while you were multiplying; well, multiplying
takes a lot longer, so you would do the add and subtraction, and you
wouldn’t use the program output from those things, but you would use the
program output from the multiplier to get yourself back in sync again.

And then you had a master programmer: you could send signals in, and
they could repeat an operation. I mean, let’s suppose you want to repeat
it five times: you would repeat it five times, and then you’d get
another signal out, which you could use to do the next operation. Or you
could check the sign of a number, and feed that in, and if it turned
negative—you know, as long as it’s positive you’d get one output, and as
soon as it’s negative you’d get another output, and you would use that
output to stimulate the operations. It’s very similar to a program
counter today. It’s like conditional transfer. This master programmer
acted as a conditional transfer, is what it did.

\interrupted by sound of fire alarm.\

That’s a fire alarm, but these buildings have cement walls and
everything, so nobody pays any attention until the firemen actually come
and knock on your door\! \laughs.\

Anyway, it’s all very logical. And once you got the hang of how these
things were going, by the way, you could go to the next unit and the
same kind of logic—I mean it was different in its details, but once you
got this basic structure of how this machine was going to work, then it
was just a question of filling in how these individual units fit in this
whole structure. It was an interesting machine. It had a square
rooter\!—which no machine today has \laughs\; they do square root by
subroutines. But this machine had a multiplier, and a divider, and a
square rooter. To multiply, it was a very interesting multiplication: it
was a function table. You sent, as your arguments in, let’s say 7 times
8; you would come out with partial products. You’d come out with a “six”
and you’d come out with a “five.” The tens partial product went into one
accumulator and the units partial product into another. Once all the
partial products had been collected, the two partial products
accumulators were added together to get the final product.

\DISC 2\

**Abbate:**

This is Disc 2\. We may have missed a little bit between discs. She
described how the ENIAC worked, and was talking about how to re-use
code.

\

### Working with J.Presper Eckert and John Mauchly

**Bartik:**

The thing that made Pres Eckert such a great engineer was that—and I
guess nobody had really thought of it up to then—those decade counters
were made up of a series of flip-flops, and they just flipped back and
forth, like the binary system; but the working of this machine did not
depend that much on the amplitude or the cleanness of the signal,
because he arranged it so these signals only had to act like a trigger:
either it triggered or it didn’t trigger. So you didn’t have to have
that good a signal to do it. Everybody said, “Oh, well, these vacuum
tubes won’t work, because the signals would fluctuate”; but he designed
it so that they didn’t have to work very well for them to still work.

**Abbate:**

So it was robust.

**Bartik:**

Robust? \laughs.\ Well, I guess you could say that\! It was robust,
but it was clever, and nobody thought it would work. But Pres said, “If
we’re careful, it will work.” He was a brilliant man. They were so much
fun to work with\! You can’t imagine.

**Abbate:**

Eckert and Mauchly?

**Bartik:**

Yes, both of them. Well, I loved John; John gave me away\! I was crazy
about him, and then afterward I worked for Pres, and when I worked for
Pres, I was crazy about him\! They were so honest. They were good men.
And Pres worked constantly, and neither one of them were concerned with
the women issue. They were problem-oriented, so that I don’t think that
they worried one iota about whether we were men or women\! \laughs.\
It was, “Can you do the problem, or can you not do the problem?” And
Pres—I mean, he was so focused that I think a train could have run into
him. (I used to be focused too, but I’ve lost a lot of it.) When he was
so focused on a particular thing, it was all-encompassing. I’m sure no
noise got into this system\! And he used to tell me so many things, and
talk to me about so many things that I didn’t know anything about, and I
would say, “Pres, I don’t anything about this.” “Well that’s all right;
I’ll explain it to you.” The fact that I would ask questions helped
clarify his mind—I’m sure that’s what it did—and if I would keep asking
him questions, saying “I don’t understand; I don’t understand, Pres”; he
would say, “Don’t worry about it. You don’t have to have it for the rest
of this.” But I never lied to him: never said “uh-huh”—like people say
something to you and then you say “uh-huh,” and you have no idea what
they’re talking about\! \laughs\. But I never did that with him,
because he would remember\! He would remember that you implied you knew
something, and you didn’t, because he had such a fabulous memory. But
both of them were fabulous teachers.

\recording pauses\

\

### Working with others on the ENIAC project

**Abbate:**

Now, what kind of interactions did you have with the other people on the
ENIAC project? There was the group of you, the six women doing the
programming . . .

**Bartik:**

Oh, you mean the engineers\!

**Abbate:**

Well, with the engineers, the maintenance people: How did that all . .
. ? Were you all in the same room, or were they somewhere else?

**Bartik:**

Oh, no. The engineers: once it was built, they were worrying about the
EDVAC, the next machine. When we first started working, the engineers
were there to debug—they used to tease us about program error, blah blah
blah. “It’s not the machine; it’s the operators”—that’s the way they
talk\! But in our group, what happened was: Ruth and Marlyn calculated
the trajectory the same way the ENIAC did it—add time by add time. It
took a long time to do this, because just to do a trajectory took about
40 hours, by hand.

So, anyway, they did that. Betty and I were working on the trajectory,
because at that time we knew that the acceptance test was going to be
around trajectories, because that’s how that was designed to do.

**Abbate:**

The acceptance test for Aberdeen.

**Bartik:**

Yes. Now, when we started, all of us started working on how to program a
trajectory, and we were all talking to each other about how to represent
it. You had to have a time line—because it was a parallel machine; we
could do more than one thing at once, so you had to have a time line to
make sure that everything got in sync periodically—and then we had to
have all the units. We had these great big sheets with units across the
top, and then at each time, what the switches were setting, and then at
the time what the program pulse was, and then at the top we had the
different digit trays—you know, memory buses. So we had to represent all
this on a flat piece of paper, so part of our problem to getting started
was to just figure out how to represent everything, so that we could
reproduce it and know what we were doing.

All of us worked on that kind of stuff, and we all worked on trying to
figure out how to get all this on this machine. And then we began to
learn how to repeat, and things like that, and Kay was very creative on
doing that. Betty and I were the workhorses—I mean, we just plodded
along and kept going; and then Marlyn and Ruth did this trajectory. So
we were all busily working away, and we got along fabulously.

The later person that came on board was Fran
\Bilas\](Frances_Spence "Frances Spence"), who was the sixth one.
Now, she ran the differential analyzer \with Kay\ during the war, and
then Kay had left, so when we came back to Philadelphia, then Fran
joined the group. Fran, of course, had not been in the course for the
punch-card equipment, and as far as I know, Fran never programmed. Nick
Metropolis and Stan Frankel from Los Alamos came to put a problem on the
machine, and so Fran and Kay did a lot of the operating of the machine.
(Betty and I never did that, because we were still busily working on
this trajectory.) And Johnny von
Neumann(John_von_Neumann "John von Neumann") used to come down; they’d
have lunch with him; because he was the one that was the instigator, I
guess, of this Los Alamos program.

Anyway, we got along great\! I never had a quarrel with any of them,
never.

**Abbate:**

So operating the machine was a separate task? Someone else might figure
out the program, but the person operating it would just be plugging in
all the . . .

**Bartik:**

Yes, okay: The first time we put a problem on was the Los Alamos program
. . .

\

### Los Alamos and ENIAC, 1945

**Abbate:**

That was 1946?

**Bartik:**

It was ‘45; it was the fall of ‘45\. They came, and we met with them.
Now, they never told us what the problem was, although we went through
all the rigmarole of what you had to do on the ENIAC and on the punch
card equipment

Now, they had had extensive experience on punch-card equipment, because
that’s what they did most of their calculating on at Los Alamos. Then
they had come and spent time with the engineers and learned how to
program the ENIAC; but they’d never run it or anything. So anyway, they
came back—and I can remember the day we set up the machine. Actually, we
hadn’t even seen the machine up till that time, by the way.

**Abbate:**

Really\!

**Bartik:**

No. We didn’t see the machine because it was classified, and they didn’t
let us see it until our classification came through.

**Abbate:**

So this is a couple of months after you returned to Philadelphia?

**Bartik:**

Oh. yes. We’d never seen it.

**Abbate:**

And you were just working out stuff on paper.

**Bartik:**

That’s right. We never saw it. So then when they came, we all went down
to the ENIAC room to set this problem up—and Herman Goldstine was
sitting there like the director of an orchestra\! \laughs.\ “Hey,
switch 1 on accumulator 1: set it to alpha\! Input from program line
A-1\! Output to A-2\!” Et cetera. And we were standing all around all
these units doing the work, and it was really ridiculous, when you get
right down to it\! But that’s the way the first one went on, with us
standing around doing this.

Nick and Stan were pretty exciting, from Los Alamos, and they had seen
the Alamogordo test on the atom bomb, so we were all excited about
talking to them, about the test and everything.

**Abbate:**

So you knew they were working on nuclear bomb issues.

**Bartik:**

Yes, but we didn’t know what the problem was. It turned out to be—years
later we found out it was the feasibility of using a nuclear bomb as a
trigger for a hydrogen bomb. It was actually a hydrogen bomb problem,
but it depends on how you look at it, I guess. But anyway, it had
something to do with triggering in a hydrogen bomb.

**Abbate:**

You must have had a general idea it was some kind of weapon.

**Bartik:**

We had no idea what it was. Johnny von Neumann was behind the
calculations, because at that time there weren’t that many people in
America—in the world—who were busily figuring out how to calculate
things numerically.

Douglas Hartree from England, who came over: he was a consultant almost
as much as von Neumann was, and they called him a Numerical Analyst; and
actually he evaluated us. The Army Ordnance had him evaluate and give
them recommendations on who they should have running these things.
Everybody used to say, “What you need are Numerical Analysts.” And
they’d say, “What’s a Numerical Analyst?” “Well, we don’t know, but
Douglas Hartree is one\!” \laughs.\ He was as cute as a button\! He
worked with Kay on one of his problems; she worked with him to teach him
how to program the ENIAC, and also they ran the problem. We were down at
Aberdeen for the 50th Anniversary, and they’re still working on the same
problem\! \laughs\—which she found very interesting. Anyway, Douglas
Hartree: We loved him. We used to go out to dinner with him. At that
time in England, there were food shortages, and rationing, and all this
kind of stuff—so he liked to come over here to eat\! \both laugh.\ In
fact, he suggested that some of us might like to . . . They
built—Maurice Wilkes at Cambridge built—I’m trying to think . . .

**Abbate:**

EDSAC?

**Bartik:**

EDSAC\! Okay, I keep forgetting which of these names belong to which.
Anyway, when we were in England in ‘51, we went to see him, and he took
us all through Cambridge, and \the EDSAC\ was really a sight to
behold. They had wire strung all everywhere, and they had little covered
bridges to walk over it. The ENIAC was so neat, there were no cables or
anything on the floor. When they built the ENIAC, there were a lot of
Bell Telephone people available because they weren’t adding telephones
and all that stuff during the war, so a lot of those guys didn’t have
jobs. Penn hired them to build the ENIAC, the wiring, and the cables,
and the way they ran them: it was neat as a pin\! But over there, you’d
wonder, “How on earth can they keep this running? Why don’t they stub
their toes on these wires?” \laughs.\ I’d never seen anything like
it\!

**Abbate:**

I’ve seen photos. Yes, it’s a mess.

**Bartik:**

It’s unbelievable how bad it was\!

But anyway, Douglas Hartree was a fabulous person. He had built a
differential analyzer using Meccano parts (which are like Tinker Toys in
England) that ran\! It did jobs. He was a brilliant man. He loved us,
and we loved him. He gave a party for us before he left. That was one of
the cutest parties I’ve ever seen. We played games, and we had dinner,
and then his wife played the piano and he sang all the Gilbert and
Sullivan songs\! We thought, “Gosh, we’ve never been to a party like
that before\!” It was really wonderful.

So, how did we get along? We all got along famously.

Now, back to the engineers\! Bob Shaw was a fabulous engineer and he did
the function tables; Chuan Chu did the square rooterdivider; Kite
Sharpless, I think, did the master programmer; Johnny Davis did the
accumulator; Harry Huskey did the input-output—getting the punch-card
equipment interfaced; and Arthur Burks did logical design on the
multiplier.

**Abbate:**

Right.

\

### From ENIAC to UNIVAC

**Bartik:**

Anyway, we found out, from doing this trajectory the same way the ENIAC
did, that we could debug better than anybody else. We could debug down
to the vacuum tube\! \laughs.\ Because we'd run the trajectory and if
it didn't come out right, we’d just put in break-points: Check the
contents of the accumulators. If wrong, we would go back and put the
breakpoint in earlier. We could hone in on a problem very quickly. God,
they were so impressed\! And not only that: they didn’t have to debug it
anymore, which they didn’t want to do. And I’ve always said in my
lectures: You know, if you want to get along with an engineer, just do
something for him that he hates to do himself, and he’ll love you
forever\! \laughs.\ And it’s true: they thought we were wonderful,
particularly Bob Shaw.

He was an albino who had to put papers up close to his face to read
them. He was very frail, but he certainly didn’t pamper himself at all,
and he was very funny. He had a quirky sense of humor and quirky
logic—like he’d go from A to Z to Z to B, and you’d be going A to
B—and when Bob would explain what his logic was, it made perfect
sense, but it was unusual. \laughs\ I worked with him again on UNIVAC.
He drew all of the logical diagrams for the UNIVAC in a month. Now, of
course, I’m not telling you that he thought up all the design. What I’m
saying is, they had meetings and decided how to do everything, but Bob
sat down and actually did the logical diagrams. And Pres, when I was
working for him and we were doing the logical design of a machine for
the UNIVAC—in case the mercury delay-line memory didn’t work, we
designed one with cathode ray tube storage—he said, “Well, you’ve done
so well,” and he said, “When the UNIVAC comes out, I don’t want us to
spend a lot of time debugging it simply because we’ve got flaws in the
logic. So I want you to check the logic of the UNIVAC.” When we checked
the UNIVAC logic, we found no major flaws in the logic of the UNIVAC—and
\Bob\ had drawn them all in a month\! It was unbelievable.

This was another case of the engineers loving you: When Pres said to
them, “You can’t make any changes in these machines without discussing
it with us, too.” We were the programmers, and of course, the engineers
thought programmers were far less than engineers\! So, I don’t know
whether it was because they had to check in with a woman, or a
programmer, but I imagine it was both: they complained bitterly. But
then when they found out that if they checked in with us when they made
changes, they didn’t have to worry about the ramifications of it—that we
were going to worry about it for them; we were going to take that change
throughout the whole machine, and make sure everything worked
together—then they loved us\!

**Abbate:**

So this was the UNIVAC?

**Bartik:**

This was the UNIVAC. This was back in 1948, actually.

**Abbate:**

How did you get from ENIAC to UNIVAC?

**Bartik:**

Okay, well here’s what happened: The ENIAC was moving to Aberdeen, and I
was going to get married, so I was not going to go to Aberdeen with the
ENIAC; and there was a guy named Dick Clippinger who worked at the wind
tunnel. You’ve heard of him.

**Abbate:**

Yes.

**Bartik:**

Yes, well he was one of the most fun people I’ve ever worked with in my
life. He was something else\! \laughs.\ So, Dick Clippinger. Everybody
from everywhere were asking to have problems put on the ENIAC; so they
didn’t have enough programmers to start with, then not enough people
knew how to program it, so Dick Clippinger decided to grab me.

Also, he and Johnny von Neumann were working together to turn ENIAC into
a stored program computer. Now, Pres and John knew this could
happen—because after the war was over nobody cared about firing
tables, and one of the things the ENIAC had were three function tables
to store the drag function for trajectories. Since there was no need for
the drag function anymore, there were over three hundred 12-digit
numbers that could be used for something else. Dick and Johnny von
Neumann proposed using them as program storage, to store the program.

**Abbate:**

Aha\!

**Bartik:**

So this system used two decimal digits, which were read out of the
function table, in the same way the program counter works today. Two
digits of the twelve-digit number were sent to the master programmer.
They made changes to the master programmer to allow it to translate the
two digits into a particular instruction, like “add accumulator.” And
then, the next two digits were used to address one of the twenty ENIAC
accumulators. Thus, 4 digits could select an instruction and an address.

Dick's programs were really too big for the ENIAC . . .

**Abbate:**

Von Neumann’s?

**Bartik:**

No, Dick Clippinger’s. So he talked to von Neumann—and at that time,
everybody was worried about what the optimum instruction set for a
computer should be; everybody was discussing this. So von Neumann
proposed a certain set of instructions to implement on the ENIAC. Once
that was done, programmers never had to set switches again; all they did
was change the digits in the function tables. The program was performed
by these digits in the function tables.

**Abbate:**

So before that, there weren’t really instructions, because you were just
wiring up what you wanted to do?

**Bartik:**

No instructions, that’s right\! We were basically doing the logical
design of a machine. We actually built a machine every time.

**Abbate:**

So it wasn’t just having a stored program, but even having the concept
of a fixed instruction set, that was new.

**Bartik:**

Yes, we had a fixed instruction set.

Dick Clippinger decided to use me as his entree into the ENIAC. He
wanted to set up a group at the University of Pennsylvania under my
direction. I could go out and hire four programmers. He would buy our
programs, so to speak\! It caused a little bit of trouble, because he
said “What are these programs?” Well, the first four or five of them
were for turning the ENIAC into a stored-program computer. He expected
me to do this while I was training these programmers.

**Abbate:**

\laughs.\

**Bartik:**

He helped too\! Because there was a period of time when they’d torn down
the ENIAC and were shipping it to Aberdeen and putting it back together.
I used to travel down to Aberdeen while I still worked for Aberdeen,
before this project at Penn got going. I went down to teach Clippinger
how to program the ENIAC. He learned to program the ENIAC; he really
did.

Anyway, they were worrying about the instruction set. The first four or
five programs—because the Army insisted they buy something, so they were
buying a program—so the first of them were programs to turn it into a
stored-program computer. From then on, we actually programmed his
problems. He finally got Penn to agree to this. They were a little
concerned about the project. Travis—who turned out to be an ass in the
long run—and caused Pres and John to leave Penn—was head of Research and
Development. When I made this proposal to Travis, he said, “What makes
you think you can do these in a month?” And I said, “Well, Dick has
already promised me that whatever I turn in, he’ll buy.” \laughs.\
“He’ll say, ‘That’s it\!’” Well, Travis didn’t think too much of
that; and he kept hemming and hawing and hemming and hawing, and all of
a sudden I realized he was afraid I’d get pregnant and quit the
project\! \laughs.\ I was sitting there, and he was hemming and hawing
and carrying on, so finally I said, “No, I don’t intend to have any
children for a while, so you don’t have to worry about that.” He finally
agreed to the project and I hired four people.

**Abbate:**

Who did you hire for that?

**Bartik:**

They all had outstanding careers: Art Gehring, Ed Schlain, and Kathe
Jacoby, and Sally Spear. Sally’s the only one that I haven’t kept in
touch with, but all the other three had long careers in the computer
business. Ed Schlain still works; he hasn’t retired yet; he works for I
think it’s the F.A.A., down in Atlantic City. Art went on to be a
logical designer for many years, and Kathe did programming of all
different kinds for many years. She was brilliant, and so was Art; very
smart—well, they all were\!

Anyway, I didn’t know this till years later: Nick Metropolis wrote in an
article about the misconceptions about the ENIAC and about the computer
industry—one of which was that Johnny von Neumann did not invent the
stored-program computer—but one of the things he says in there, which I
didn’t know, was that he and Klara von Neumann had learned to program
the ENIAC. Now, I never saw her, never met her; I don’t know if she was
any good; I don’t know anything about it; but Klara von Neumann and
Adele Goldstine and Nick Metropolis tried to turn the ENIAC into a
stored-program computer and couldn’t do it. Which is very
interesting—because I never knew that anybody had, other than us.

**Abbate:**

They’d done this shortly before? Or when . . . ?

**Bartik:**

Yes, apparently, because they wanted to do some Los Alamos problem on
it.

So anyway, Johnny von Neumann and Dick worked out this instruction set.
We used to go up to Princeton to consult with him every couple weeks,
and we would work all day and then we’d go in late in the afternoon and
talk to him, and then we’d go back and work and tell him our ideas. So
what we did was to shrink down the instruction set and make some
instructions simpler—not have such complicated ones—till we had an
instruction set that worked.

**Abbate:**

So his original one wasn’t practical, in terms of . . . ?

**Bartik:**

Well no, it wasn’t that. I mean, there wasn’t anything wrong with it,
other than the equipment.

**Abbate:**

In terms of implementing it on what you had . . .

**Bartik:**

It couldn’t be implemented the way it was structured. Please understand,
right at this time everybody was talking about what instruction set was
needed; it wasn’t cut and dried the way it is today. Also people used
different instruction set architectures. The ENIAC instruction set was
built around a central accumulator. The ENIAC no longer added
accumulator A to B; it added the addressed accumulator to the central
accumulator—so it was a central accumulator system, which is much
simpler, logically.

**Abbate:**

Is this a stack, sort of?

**Bartik:**

No, it was just an accumulator, but the same central one was always one
of the two accumulators used in an operation. Most computers today are
designed using a central accumulator logic. The instruction would
transfer to the central accumulator and add the contents of another
accumulator to the central one, then would transfer it back to someplace
else, and you’d subtract accumulator, and stuff like that. It made the
ENIAC a lot slower, because it was serial and did not use the
parallelism that was built into it. What it did was to make it simple to
change from one program to another. No longer did programmers have the
horrendous task of building a new machine for each problem. It was much
easier to program. Our generation was the only generation that used it
as a parallel machine; all the rest of them used it as a stored-program
serial machine. As a matter of fact, this was the first stored-program
machine, by the way: the ENIAC operating as a stored program computer.

Dick Clippinger, Adele Goldstine and I really did the programming. Dick
had two mathematicians, John Giese and Galbraith, working with us to
learn how the ENIAC did calculations so they could set up some of their
problems with the wind tunnel to run on it.

It’s funny: John Giese complained constantly about being there, because
he wasn’t interested in this kind of stuff—applied math; he really
wanted to do theoretical math. I saw him at the 50th Anniversary, and I
said, “Well, John, I guess you’ve changed your mind.” He looked at me as
though he’d never heard of such a thing\! He’d complained constantly—but
50 years later, it was as though he’d loved computing all his
life\laughs.\

\

### Reflections on Dick Clippinger and the McCarthy Era

Dick Clippinger, of course, eventually became head of the Ballistics
Research Lab. During the McCarthy era he got ousted. It was really a
tragedy. He was one of the most fun guys I ever worked with. He was
building a house, and so after we worked on the ENIAC we went out to his
building site. When I used to go down to teach him about the ENIAC, his
staff were always interrupting; so we used to go into hiding, and
sometimes we’d have two hours before they found him\! \both laugh.\
One time, we went down to the furnace room—we were working down
there—but they found him by noontime. And sometimes we’d stay home. He
had about four kids, and he’d turn up the hi-fi so we wouldn’t have to
hear the kids. \laughs.\ And then after work I’d go out and help him
pick up rocks on his land where he was going to build a house. He was
fun. One time, he got up on the table and lay down, and he had a
handkerchief. He rolled it up and made a little pyramid out of his
handkerchief and put it under his head for a pillow. This little pyramid
was his pillow\! And he said, “Yup, I learned that on the Trans-Siberian
Railroad.” \laughs.\ And it was true\! He had really been on the
Trans-Siberian Railroad.

He worked hard, but he was adorable. And when they finally got the
hearing on his clearance—and that was like two years later, after his
job was gone and he’d moved up to Boston—the hearing took about a half
an hour. I mean, he had Johnny von Neumann, Dick Lehmer, and
Dederick—great scientists—testifying for him. There was a man at
Aberdeen that was a security risk. They fired him, and then they were
going to deport him. Well, a group of scientists at Aberdeen signed a
petition not to deport him. They did not complain about them not using
him, but they didn’t feel he should be deported. I guess he’d been here
a long time; I don’t know just why. But anyway, that was one \point
against Clippinger\. Two: on Thursday night, he used to catch the
overnight train to Boston. He taught a math class at Harvard on Friday.
He would catch the Friday night overnight back to Aberdeen. One of his
students was supposedly a communist.

**Abbate:**

At Harvard?

**Bartik:**

At Harvard. Can you believe this? I mean, that’s how bad the McCarthy
era was.

**Abbate:**

So that was the evidence against him?

**Bartik:**

Well, yes\! Well, the evidence against him was absurd. Of course,
Eckert-Mauchly lost its clearance and everything because it was
questioned—I mean, somebody undoubtedly wrote them a letter. It was all
cleared up, but then the FBI office at Philadelphia protested.
Eckert-Mauchly lost a lot of contracts, you know; one of the reasons
they had to sell Rem Rand was because of that.

**Abbate:**

I don’t follow: Why did they lose their clearance?

**Bartik:**

Because somebody wrote to Philadelphia and told them—I mean, that’s how
bad it was. Bob Shaw lost his clearance; you know why he did? He was an
albino and obviously couldn’t drive a car. He liked to go places and do
things, so he bought himself a car. People would drive him places; he
never drove it himself. At that time, not that many people had a nice
car, so he never had any problem finding people to drive him someplace.
One weekend, one of the people that drove him places said, “Could I
borrow your car for the weekend?” He wanted to go to Washington to visit
friends. He went to Washington, parked the car on the street, and went
up to an apartment to see friends. There was a demonstration in
Washington that week, and the Washington police went up and down the
streets and took all the license numbers of cars parked on the street.
The assumption was that Bob Shaw was in Washington taking part in this
demonstration, and he lost his clearance. I mean, it’s outrageous\!
Well, it’s outrageous today. You have a hard time fathoming this, but
that happened. And then, John Mauchly’s secretary supposedly at one time
had belonged to the Communist Party. Frankly, I’m sure—I mean, in my
heart, I feel sure—that somebody wanted them to fail and wrote the
letter. And I have visions of who it could be. It was an outrageous
time.

Let’s see: Where were
we?

\

### Reflections on the EDVAC Report and the Transition from ENIAC to EDVAC

**Abbate:**

So after you finished turning ENIAC into a stored-program computer. . .

**Bartik:**

Then Pres and John asked me to come work for them. So Art Gehring took
over this project—because by this time the programming in the ENIAC was
entirely different, and he was a very bright guy, so he took it over—and
then the next year, Art came to work with me, and then Ed took it over
for a year\! So I think it lasted for like three years, and I guess Dick
Clippinger was probably gone by then.

That was a very exciting time, turning it into a stored-program
computer. We worked with Johnny von Neumann, and he was a very exciting
consultant. He spoke with a very ingratiating manner, almost as though
he were apologizing for what he was saying, although he knew he wasn’t.
Goldstine claimed that he used to walk over to his open door when a
pretty girl walked down the hall, he’d be talking away and he’d walk
over and watch her walk down the hall. \laughs.\ I don’t know if
that’s true or not\! He used to scratch himself inadvertently at
times, and stuff like that. But he was very ingratiating, and very
logical. I mean, we’d go and tell him, “This isn’t working well; we need
to do something different," and he’d make various proposals of things we
could do. We’d try them out and come back and tell him the results, and
things like that. That’s basically the way it worked.

**Abbate:**

You had said that he didn’t come up with the stored-program concept. Who
did come up with that?

**Bartik:**

Well, it was the engineers at ENIAC. What happened was, Johnny von
Neumann—they never even told him\! He was a consultant at Aberdeen;
\the Army\ never even told him about the ENIAC, because they didn’t
think it would work, so he didn’t know a thing about it. So one time, he
was standing on the railroad platform, because he used to come down from
Princeton to Aberdeen; and Herman Goldstine used to come from
Philadelphia to Aberdeen, because he was the liaison between the Army
and the University of Pennsylvania. He saw Johnny von Neumann on the
platform, so he went over and started telling him about the ENIAC. Now
you understand, ENIAC was a classified project, and people were not
allowed to write about it, or publish about it; \but\ he told him
about the ENIAC. So Johnny von Neumann was excited about this and he
asked if he could come see it. So Herman said “Yeah,” and he invited him
down. Now before he came, Pres said, “If he asks a particular question,
I’ll know he knows something about this business. If he doesn’t ask the
question, I’ll know he doesn't know anything.” He did ask the question,
and the question was: “How do you control it?” That was his question,
and that was the question that Pres had said was the important one.

He came to see the ENIAC; but the ENIAC design was already finished by
this time, and they were working on EDVAC. They were already working on
EDVAC. So he said, “May I come to your meetings?” And they said “Yes.”
So they would have meetings every couple weeks—and that’s what pisses me
off about this McCartney's book because he describes these meetings, and
he describes them based on my descriptions of our meetings with von
Neumann—you know, when we were turning it into a stored-program
computer. I know damn good and well they didn’t work that way—and I know
nothing about the EDVAC, because I had nothing whatsoever to do with
it\! That’s what really pissed me off: he used what I described in some
other situation as though it happened at EDVAC.

**Abbate:**

This is Scott McCartney?

**Bartik:**

That’s Scott McCartney. Anyway, von Neumann came to their meetings, and
they were designing the EDVAC. One time when he came, he said he
wouldn’t be able to come for a while, because he had to go to Los
Alamos. So he wasn’t there the next time. Then Herman came in with this
paper and showed the paper Johnny had written.

**Abbate:**

The EDVAC report.

**Bartik:**

The so-called EDVAC report. And he never even mentioned anybody else—as
though these were all his ideas\! Gave no credit to anybody\! Well, they
thought it was like minutes of the meeting; but Herman, being the
Security Officer, sent it to about 200 different places—universities and
different places in the military—and that’s how that got started: the
EDVAC report got distributed. It was a confidential project and Pres and
John were not permitted to talk and write about it. Then, when Pres and
John finally went to patent the EDVAC, Herman and von Neumann had
already applied for a patent using the EDVAC report. Von Neumann said
the reason that he did it was because he wanted it in the public domain,
while Pres and John would use it for commercial purposes\! He professed
to be the good guy; while they were the bad guys. Really\! Pres and John
hated him to the day they died. They despised him. They despised
Goldstine. Pres wouldn’t be in the same room with Goldstine for years,
but his wife told me that just before he died, she was in the hospital
one day, and they said, “A Goldstine wants to talk to you.” She said,
“Oh, forget it; he doesn’t want to talk . . . ” and Pres said, “Oh,
yes I do\!” He said that Herman had been calling him, and they had been
talking. Nobody knows what they talked about—well, Goldstine probably
does, but who would believe him? I mean, he has Parkinson’s now. But
anyway, he did talk to him before he died, and apparently he had a
number of conversations with him.

But they despised von Neumann. The ENIAC patent just broke John. John
never got over it. He was just so hurt at the idea that the judge would
say that he got his ideas from Atanasoff. Atanasoff had never even said
that he invented the computer. It was Honeywell that went out and found
him, and told him he did. In fact, those people at Ames, Iowa even say
that he invented the binary number system\! That’s an invention?
\laughs.\ That’s so stupid\! You will see a bunch of \[reviews of the
McCartney book\ if you go on Amazon.com. I have one in there, too, but
you have reviews from people from Ames, Iowa. Then some say Zuse did it;
and you have people that say that Enigma; and then some say Atanasoff.
It’s very interesting, the readers’ comments on Amazon.com about that
book.

That was a very bitter experience, and a betrayal as far as Pres and
John were concerned, and as far as I’m concerned. They were betrayed.
Other people feel the same way. Nobody thinks Atanasoff invented the
computer; I mean, that’s just a joke. Now \McCartney\ says in this
book—and you may know more about it—he feels that the judge played God.
UNIVAC, after they got the patent, began figuring out how to collect
money from royalties on the use of the patent. One of the things they
did, first, though, was to sign a cross-licensing agreement with IBM for
ten million dollars. Then they sent Honeywell a bill for what they
figured they owed, and Honeywell figured it was cheaper to challenge the
patent than to pay the royalties. According to Scott \McCartney\, he
believes the judge was ticked off because he felt that cross-licensing
agreement was restraint of trade, but the time had elapsed so they
couldn’t be prosecuted. He was concerned because at that time, in the
computing industry, they talked about “Snow White and the Seven
Dwarves.” IBM was Snow White, and all the other computer companies
\were the dwarves: Sperry Rand (which had acquired UNIVAC), Honeywell,
Burroughs, NCR, Control Data, RCA, and General Electric\. He was afraid
that the six other Dwarves would be ruined. He couldn’t do anything
about the restraint of trade, but he could fix them by denying the
patent. Scott believes that the judge played God, and that’s basically
what he did.

**Abbate:**

Could be. There have been a lot of bad computer patent decisions.

**Bartik:**

Well, it’s hard. I mean, for example, it’s very interesting what
software is\!

I don’t know. A lot of people say, “Well, everything’s just building on
something else," which is true. Nobody just goes out and invents
something in a vacuum. And the interesting thing is that at the time
John and Pres were thinking about the ENIAC, others were thinking about
other computers—I mean Aiken, with his machine \at Harvard\; MIT with
its Whirlwind; Germany with its Zuse ; and so on. It seems to me that
things are developed when the time is ripe, and somebody will pay for
it. That’s why so many of the things that people had thought of before
came through during World War II. Somebody would now pay for them, and
the technology could be implemented. But prior to that . . . I mean,
like radar. Who would have paid for radar, if it hadn’t been for the
military? So I think that’s true.

I’m just telling you the history of the computer and what I think are
the really important events that have occurred. Well, software
development is one of them—which I didn’t have in there, by the way.

**Abbate:**

In where?

**Bartik:**

When I was giving you that list of the important things I thought
happened in the computer field; the important events.

\

### BINAC and UNIVAC

**Abbate:**

That’s true. Well, maybe we can get to some of the software milestones.

So, when you started the EMCC, what were you actually working on?

**Bartik:**

I was hired to be a programmer, and they were doing the BINAC. The BINAC
was designed to control a Snark missile, and it consisted of twin
computers. They did exactly the same things and checked every operation
along the way. I did a little bit for math and sort subroutines. Mainly,
after I started, I began worrying about programming the BINAC to control
the Snark missile.

Pres became very concerned about whether or not the mercury delay-line
memory would work. They really built the BINAC as a test for a lot of
the components of the UNIVAC, so it used a lot of the same components.
Pres was so concerned that the mercury delay-line memory might not work
that he wanted a backup machine. It would use cathode ray tube memory.
He didn’t want to take any of his engineers off the UNIVAC, so they
think programmers—you know, that it didn’t matter what you do\!
\laughs.\ So he came in and asked if he could have two programmers,
and John came to me. I remember when John came to ask me to work for
Pres. Pres had a volatile temper, and I’d heard him yelling and
screaming at engineers. Due to my father’s rages, I’ve never been able
to deal with angry men. I haven’t quite ever gotten over being a little
girl, I guess. Anyway, I said to John, “If he ever flies into a rage at
me, I’m outta here.” And he said, “Well, I don’t think he will.” And he
never did\! He never did.

So Art Gehring and I worked together. I’ve had three great partners in
my life, programming: one is Betty Holberton; the second is Art Gehring;
and the third one was Adele Goldstine. It’s the most wonderful way, I
think, to do anything like that. Errors are really fatal to the final
output. If you have someone that’s almost equal in intelligence to work
with, and you try to find flaws in each other’s work, it is a wonderful
working environment. Instead of getting mad when either finds flaws,
you’re delighted. You can’t build something that’s got mistakes in it.
So it’s fantastic. In fact, after I was out of the business for 16
years, I came back in the business, and was looking for a job. UNIVAC
asked Art about me. He said, “I don’t care how long she’s been out of
the business; she’s the best logical designer I’ve ever worked with.
Hire her\!” \laughs.\ Isn't that wonderful. We were great partners.

**Abbate:**

So you would each code for a bit, and then what—swap your code and check
it? How did that work?

**Bartik:**

No, we worked together. Somebody would say, “How do you think this
works?” and then we would start arguing back and forth how it would
work. So we worked together, constantly. No, we didn’t do it separately.
We didn’t know the logical design, either.

**Abbate:**

Was that common, to have people working in pairs like that? Was that
sort of the norm?

**Bartik:**

I have no idea. But I had comparable experiences with Betty Snyder
Holberton programming the trajectory for the ENIAC Demonstration and
with Adele Goldstine on the Taub problem. They were great. I know for
the ENIAC, Kay worked with Dr. Hartree. That’s the way they did it
there: they had pairs; but generally one of the them would be the person
that knew the problem and the other one would be the programmer. But
actually, with Adele and me, and Betty and me, and Art and me, we were
on the same level—and it was fantastic.

**Abbate:**

So Mauchly was asking you to actually design this machine?

**Bartik:**

Yes, logical design—and I didn’t know a thing about logical design\! It
was also the first time microcoding was done, but UNIVAC in its wisdom:
all of ours records of the electrostatic UNIVAC have disappeared. But
anyway, Pres said “I’ll teach you.” We didn’t know anything about it.
“I’ll teach you everything you need to know.” We were not allowed to
discuss it with anybody except him and each other.

**Abbate:**

Because it was secret?

**Bartik:**

Because it was secret. My husband was an electrical engineer. One day,
Eckert gave Art and me this article to read and we couldn’t understand
it. We worked on it most of the day. Art said, “This is disgusting. The
only reason we can’t understand it’s because we’re not engineers. An
engineer will understand this. I’m going to ask Bill when he comes in.”
We were planning to go out. Art had a girlfriend, and Bill was coming
in, and we were going to go to dinner and to the opera. So Art said,
“When Bill comes in, I’m going to ask him.” I said, “Oh, you know what
Pres said.” “I don’t care,” he said, “It has nothing to do with what
we’re doing”—you know, there was no link that anybody else would make.
And he says, “It’s simply because we’re not engineers\!” So Bill came
in, and Art said, “What does this mean?” So Art showed it to Bill, and
he was reading it when Pres walked into the room\! \both laugh.\ Oh,
my God\! Pres wanted to throw a tantrum so bad. But he said, “Listen: I
told you you’re not to discuss this with anybody but me.” He said, “That
includes husbands, mothers, relatives, wives, whatever. Nobody but me\!”
And Art was saying “But, but, but” \laughs\, and Pres wasn’t
listening\!

My husband had a contract to shield the centrifuge at Johnsville Naval
Air Development Center. It’s just by Hatboro, off of Street Road. They
were building a centrifuge, and the centrifuge was to test the human
reaction to G’s of gravity. In fact, the astronauts came to be swung
around on this centrifuge. The signals from the human body are so small
that they wanted to make sure they had a perfectly shielded building.
His task was to shield this centrifuge building. Anyway, Pres was
interested in it, so he turned to him and began talking to him as though
he had never thrown a fit\! He talked and talked. Art and I were getting
nervous, because his girlfriend was waiting downtown for us. It was time
for us to get going. We got up and put on our coats. I got my
pocketbook, and we walked out of the room. We were on the seventh floor
of this building, so we hit the button for the elevator. Pres was
talking to Bill, talking, talking, talking. We got in the elevator, and
Pres got in the elevator with us\! \laughs.\ Talking, talking,
talking. We got out of the elevator; Pres got out of the elevator; and
we got on the street corner, and Pres looked up and saw all this traffic
and said, “I guess you people want to leave\!” \laughs.\

But that’s how focused he was. We did not laugh at him. We thought it
was wonderful, actually\! \laughs.\ We were very fond of him\!

One time he got mad at me, and he wanted to yell at me so bad; it was
funny. He had told me this particular instruction; it was a complex
instruction, so he said, “Now I’m afraid I’m going to forget this. I
want you to write all this down and keep a record of it.” And I did, but
they moved us and switched desks around. I had put it in my desk drawer
and I could not find it. So one day Pres came and asked me about this
instruction, and how it worked. I told him I couldn’t find it. He had a
little knife on the end of a chain, like a watch chain, and he used to
twirl it, walk around and twirl it. He walked back and forth twirling
and twirling this around\! He said “I told you to keep this,” and I
said, “I know you did, Pres\! You did tell me, and I’m sorry, but I
don’t know where it is.” So he left the room. Pretty soon he came
walking back, and he says, “Sit down. That’s all right. I remember how
it was done.” And that was the end of it. \laughs.\ He was
fascinating. I loved working for him, loved it. So did Art.

So we were designing this mercury delay line backup. One day he told us
he wanted to make sure there was nothing wrong with the UNIVAC logic
when they built the machine. He told us that we were doing so well, he
wanted us to check the logic of the UNIVAC. We did that. One day he came
in and said he was really concerned, because there were no check
circuits in the UNIVAC except the evenodd check on the memory. They
would count the bits in the memory and make sure the number was always
odd. If it turned out it was even, the UNIVAC would put a bit in so it
would be odd. That was so that it would indicate an error if all of the
memory was wiped out. He was really concerned that the UNIVAC didn’t
have any check circuits in it, other than the one on the memory. He
wanted us to put in some check circuits.

**Abbate:**

And what would the check circuits do?

**Bartik:**

Well, that’s an interesting story too, because we began telling the
engineers that they had to put these check circuits in. They complained
bitterly, because they had to duplicate a lot of things, if there wasn’t
some other way for it to be checked. The engineers complained that we
were putting in too many check circuits. We said that this was what we
are supposed to be doing. They thought we were crazy. Pres was always
busy, but, finally one day, we had a meeting on the check circuits. It
took about ten minutes. He said, “Well, the rule is: You know, if you
have a police force and you want to check for corruption, you do not
have every policeman checking every other policeman. You have one
policeman—at least one policeman—checking every other policeman. And the
assumption is that you’re not going to have two corrupt policemen\!” He
says, “It’s the same thing here. Everything in the machine must be
checked by at least one other thing, and if it isn’t, you
duplicate—period.” The meeting was over\! \laughs.\ He was fabulous,
really. So that was the end of it. I mean, we just went back and put the
check circuits in.

**Abbate:**

So these were to check the hardware operation. It wasn’t for software
debugging?

**Bartik:**

Oh, no no no. At that time they were still using machine code. In fact,
that’s how Grace Hopper got in the business. Up until this time, we had
programs and we had subroutines. John Mauchly got the idea for Macros,
and that was the first thing they did in the assembly languages for
these computers. Programmers could call a macro—let’s say a square root,
or whatever. Programmers developed macros, which programs could call.
That was the way the first assembler programs were done.

Betty was busily designing the console for the UNIVAC, and also the sort
routines—because we realized it was a commercial machine, and file
processing and bean counting are the two things that they do. We didn’t
have anything but mag tapes, which were serial, so master files were
sorted. When transactions were made to the master file, we called it
batch processing: batches of transactions were sorted and run against
the master file to update it. Everybody realized that the sort routines
were the crux of commercial processing. Betty worked on the sort
routines. She also designed the first console. She did most of the
design, although other people had input to it.

**Abbate:**

I’m sorry. She did most of the design for . . . ?

**Bartik:**

For the console, for the first UNIVAC.

**Abbate:**

For the actual physical interface?

**Bartik:**

For the actual physical unit. I mean logically; I don’t mean
electrically. And she also was very responsible for the instruction set
that we used for the UNIVAC—because everybody was arguing; I mean, there
were “Code 3” and “4” and whatever that people had proposed; different
instruction sets.

**Abbate:**

How different was it from the EDVAC instruction set?

**Bartik:**

Well it was the same, sort of, except the EDVAC was assumed to be for
scientific processing, so you had a lot more things with the UNIVAC that
would be for file processing.

The thing is, you see—the thing that Travis . . The reason that Pres and
John left Penn is they had the agreement with Penn that they got the
patent on the ENIAC, and presumably the EDVAC; however, Penn, and any
other educational institution could use the patents. Well, Travis came
back—he had been in the Navy—and they made him head of Research and
Development, and the first thing he said to them is, “You don’t get the
patents on the EDVAC.” And he said, “Either you sign this agreement . .
. ”—at first he said like 24 hours, I think it was, but finally he gave
him two weeks—“Either you sign it or you’re out.” Well, the guy was too
stupid to understand that he didn’t have anybody else to build the
EDVAC\! Because as soon Pres and John left, the other engineers went
too. I mean, what engineer wouldn’t want to work with the greatest
engineer in the world\! I mean, they realized how smart these guys were,
and they just cleaned out immediately; they didn’t have anybody\! So
then they were trying to build the damn thing. Well, it took them years,
and finally a guy named Sam Libkin finally got it together, but it was
way, way late. \laughs\

These people just didn’t understand that we were onto something new,
something different. And UNIVAC: Rem. Rand bought UNIVAC, and they made
the same mistake; they had no concept about computers and what it would
take to run them. I worked in Washington: they’d called me Archimedes,
and they called Pres and John dreamers. They weren’t dreamers\! They
knew that you had to have software; you had to have maintenance; you had
to have training—the whole thing—and Rem. Rand just didn’t understand
it. They never even trained their salesmen to sell them\! They didn’t
know a thing about it, the salesmen; they used to take me out with them,
to talk about UNIVAC. I was out with this guy, and I said, “My God, what
are you guys doing with me out here? That’s not a UNIVAC application\!”
He said, “Don’t say anything\! Don’t say anything\! I’m selling ‘em
typewriters.” I mean, these salesmen didn’t do a thing except use it to
sell equipment they knew about. They didn’t know a thing about it. And
they didn’t even develop a commission schedule for them; no training; I
mean, they were stupid.

**Abbate:**

When Remington Rand took over the EMCC . . .

**Bartik:**

Well, we have another whole era in here, which we’ve skipped. A guy
named \Henry\ Straus, when they began to have financial problems, and
they realized they had . . . Your customers were the Census Bureau,
which had ordered one; American Totalizator—well, when Straus was on it,
they were very interested in it, because what they do are the odds at
the race tracks; and ACNielsen bid money on it for tracking the
entertainment business; and Prudential Life Insurance: this guy—he was
very influential; what was his name?—from the Prudential Life Insurance
Company. So those were the financers. And then when they needed more
money, Straus got interested in them, and he had a very good
relationship with them, and I think if he’d have lived the story would
have been quite different, because he was popular with the engineers and
the programmers and with everybody. What happened was, they were on a
private plane, and most of the top management of American Totalizator
was on the plane, and the plane went down and killed them all. So
American Totalizator was without their top management, so they wanted to
pull back; they didn’t want to have anything to do with it—because
nobody there other than Straus was really that much involved with it—so
they pulled out. Anyway, Rem. Rand came along and bought them, and then
their crew came in.

Now, I don’t really know much about that, because I still worked for
them, but my husband took a job in Washington and I went to Washington,
and I worked at their sales office down there. One of the things I was
to do was to train the Census Bureau—the programmers—so I did. Then the
Aviation Supply Office for the Navy was about to kick out their \old\
equipment, so they said, “Can the UNIVAC do this?” So I was given the
job of figuring how to do this Aviation Supply Office—and it was perfect
for UNIVAC, because it was an inventory control problem. So I worked on
that.

It was interesting \laughs\: they had the Vice President of Sales come
down from New York, and they had these Navy guys. These Navy guys were
really the workers—they were not above the point; they were Commanders,
and Lieutenant-Commanders, and on that level—and they knew how the
problem worked, and they used punch-card equipment and stuff like that,
and they used this system from Rem. Rand—Cardex system it was called—
that took control of their inventory. They had the meeting, and
\Remington Rand\ were very concerned about a woman doing this for the
UNIVAC, so they had a guy come down from Philadelphia to talk about its
feasibility. I mean, he didn’t know anything, except just in theory. So
they yammered away all day until late in the day, and then they had this
guy from Philadelphia talk, and then I got up and told them how to do
it. They went wild\! They . . . went . . . ape\! \laughs.\ I mean, it
was one of those ideal situations where one would object and they would
answer each other’s objections back and forth\! So it was really one of
those—I mean, these guys knew what the problem was; they saw the
solution; it was fabulous\! Well, they said I couldn’t go to dinner with
them, because they were probably going to tell some risqué jokes and I’d
be the only woman there, so I couldn’t go; so they had me go out to
dinner with one of the Commanders’ wives. So we went out; and then they
left the dinner as soon as possible and came out to the bar to talk to
me—it was really unbelievable—because they really wanted to talk about
this\!

And they never let me give another presentation. Can you believe that?

**Abbate:**

Because you had upstaged the other person?

**Bartik:**

Do I know? I have no idea. They used to have the Assistant Manager give
these talks, and they’d take me along to answer questions. Well, he used
to give the most horrendous talks you’d ever seen in your life\! But
anyway, that’s what they did, and I hated it, so I was happy to get out
of it. When I came back to Philadelphia—my husband took a job with
UNIVAC, and they didn’t allow husband and wife to work in the same
place, so they were going to set up a special office. By this time, Bob
Shaw’s clearance had been questioned, and I couldn’t work there because
of my husband, so they were going to set up a special group at another
site, so we could all work. But by this time I was so sick of Rem. Rand,
and so sure that they were going to screw it up, that I just took
sixteen years off and had a family.

\

### Family Life & Coming Back into the Business

**Abbate:**

And you had four kids?

**Bartik:**

Three. So, that was it.

But I was very lucky, too. When I came back in the business: I never was
on mainframes again, but when I came back in the business, minicomputers
were just starting, and I worked for a publisher, and I developed a
service on minicomputers for them. At that time, there were about
fifteen minicomputers that came out in a year. So we were going crazy\!

**Abbate:**

And this was ‘67?

**Bartik:**

This was ‘67, Yes. And it was also interesting. When I came back to
work, I worked actually for Isaac Auerbach, and he had also worked on
UNIVAC. I worked in their publishing of reports on computers, and they
said, “Well, the way to get you back in the business is to be a
technical editor,” so I could read all the reports about all these
things. So I’d no more than gotten there when there was going to be an
ACM meeting in San Francisco, so they said to me, “Hurry up and edit
this. We’re going to hand this out in San Francisco.” And I looked at
this thing, and I began to laugh, and I said, “You know, Pres Eckert
described this to me back in 1945\!” And it was an ink-jet printer.

**Abbate:**

Really\!

**Bartik:**

It was an ink-jet printer that was being implemented. It was one off the
new—well, ink-jet printers: that’s when they came out.

**Abbate:**

But I mean, he had thought about this ?

**Bartik:**

It was very interesting: There was a salesman, his name was Brown. He
was their salesman for the UNIVAC, so he kept saying to Pres, “Everybody
wants to know how you’re going to print, what the printing’s going to be
like.” Pres said, “Oh, I’m too busy, and there are lots of ways to do
it.” And so Wistar Brown kept pestering him, \and Pres would say,\
“Oh, I’m too busy to do this. Don’t worry about it; we’ll have a
printer.” He didn’t know what to say to his customers, and so he’s still
pestering him, so one afternoon Pres sat him down and told him what the
possibilities were for printers for this thing, and he gave him about
twelve\! \laughs.\ Wistar came out of there reeling\! He was
absolutely reeling, because he had all of these proposals that Pres was
thinking about—because he thought Pres hadn’t thought about it at all\!
\laughs.\ I don’t think he ever doubted him again, when he told him
something like that\! So anyway, this ink-jet printer was one of the
things that he was thinking about. He described it to me. And I can
understand, to some extent, why he did \think of it\, because the way
it works is somewhat similar to the cathode ray tube storage, because
it’s stored as dots.

\

### Touring and Speaking at Microsoft

**Abbate:**

You were taking a tour of Microsoft?

**Bartik:**

We were at Microsoft. The Hoppers invited us to come, which is a women’s
group.

**Abbate:**

Oh, right.

**Bartik:**

So we were there for three or four days, and during the course of this
we had lunch with some of their women managers. So we walked into the
room, and of course none of us had ever met each other before, and it
was a little awkward; nobody knew quite what to say. So finally one of
them said, “What are you women really doing?” So we said, well, we were
trying to set the record straight, as far as we knew it—that there was
so much misinformation about the beginning of the computing industry
that we wanted to set it straight. Well, they began to jabber and
chatter like mad\! “Boy, you can say that again\!” And they began to
talk about who got credit for what, and they hadn’t done it—today\!
Today. I mean, it was unbelievable\! It really opened them up.

But when we were there, we asked them, “If you have an idea, how do you
get it implemented?” And they said, “Oh well, you make a proposal to
Bill, and Bill makes a decision.” \laughs.\ Can you believe that? It’s
what they said\!

**Abbate:**

It’s probably true. \pause\

\

### Working with Grace Hopper

**Abbate:**

Did you work with Grace Hopper?

**Bartik:**

Well, she came there. She was an alcoholic when I knew her.

**Abbate:**

How much did you overlap there?

**Bartik:**

Over a year. She came there from Aiken—from Harvard—and John hired her,
because he had this idea for an assembler language for UNIVAC. So then
she brought in one of her cohorts, Herb Mitchell, and the two of them .
. . I don’t know why Herb isn’t credited, because Herb actually was
brought in to be the boss of all of us, as I understand, but he never
was.

Grace: she was an alcoholic. She used to reek to high heaven\! When I
was in Washington, after I left there, she was supposed to give some
presentation, and got drunk and couldn’t do it; and she was always
trying to get the men in bed with her. So they finally said to her,
“Either clean up your act or you’re out.” So she went to a treatment
center and got cleaned up, and as far as I know, she never drank again.

But women didn’t like her, because she always had these boy toys on her
arm. \laughs.\ And she never gave anybody credit for anything, except
herself\! Women didn’t like her. In fact, I don’t know if anybody went
to her christening of the ship that was named after her, because they
called me up, and I certainly wasn’t going, and I don’t know of anybody
that went.

This little university, my State Teachers’ College: they had her out
there twice—with her little piece of wire\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Well, she was supposed to be a good speaker.

**Bartik:**

Well, she did it for about twenty years. And then she was sort of an old
curmudgeon. I told you I developed this book—a loose-leaf notebook
service—on minicomputers. There were all these minicomputers coming out,
and then some of them were being implemented with microprocessors, and I
was really having a hard time keeping up with the field. So one time I
went to a meeting—I guess it was ACM, out in Chicago—and I walked into
the hotel room, and here’s old Grace Hopper. She comes stomping up to
me, and she doesn’t say “Hello, how are you?” or anything; she says,
“WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO DO ABOUT MICROPROCESSORS?” \laughs.\

Betty Holberton despises her—absolutely despises her.

**Abbate:**

Because she felt she didn’t get enough credit?

**Bartik:**

That’s right\! She didn’t give other people credit for what they did.
Kathryn Kleiman doesn’t like for us to say anything bad about Grace.

**Abbate:**

She’s kind of an icon.

**Bartik:**

She wasn’t that bright; come on. She wasn’t any brighter than the rest
of them. She certainly didn’t hold a candle to Pres and John. There was
no innovation in her life, so far as I know. But that’s why women don’t
like her. \pause\

I guess that as far as Kathryn Kleiman’s concerned, the women should all
stick together. And I think they should too—if people are worth it. What
gets me is the women that don’t promote women because they’re women, for
God’s sakes\! They take on the prejudices of the men.

\

### Reflections on Women in Technology & the Workplace

**Abbate:**

What kind of experiences did you have, in your working life, as far as:
Did you feel that as a woman, you were not given opportunities for
promotion?

**Bartik:**

Well, I was flatly told that at Honeywell. When I worked for Honeywell,
I was too blunt, and the next generation of women would be the one that
made it, not people like me.

**Abbate:**

I’m sorry: When was this?

**Bartik:**

Well, that was in 1978\.

**Abbate:**

So after you came back and—you were at Auerbach for maybe four years or
something?

**Bartik:**

Nine years.

**Abbate:**

For nine years. So you were there from ‘67 to ‘75\.

**Bartik:**

Or ‘76, maybe. Let’s see: I was in Northern New Jersey; I was in
Minneapolis ‘78 to ‘80; I was in Florida ‘76 to ‘77\. I guess I was in
Northern New Jersey ‘75 to ‘76\. \pause\

But I have other characteristics that make me not management material,
and I came to realize that. One of them is: I am blunt. I’m not a
yes-person, and I can’t pretend to be. I feel as though if I screw
around with my brain, then I don’t have anything to sell. What I sell,
really, is what’s in my brain, what’s in my mind; and if I start playing
funny games with it, I don’t have anything to sell.

I can give you an example of one of the things that happened. I had two
jobs in a row that basically—I got out of them, or I didn’t succeed in
them, primarily because I was too open and honest. I was in Florida and
was Market Support Manager for this minicomputer company, Systems
Engineering Labs. My manager was named Sam Bosch; he was from Digital
Equipment. They had hired a man to be head of Research and Development
of Hardware and Software from a company on the West Coast, and the
reason they had hired him was that their equipment was getting aged and
they needed a new processor. Well, the President of the company could
not make a decision unless his back were to the wall—anyway, they didn’t
do anything about it—and finally, when their back was to the wall, one
of their Executive Vice Presidents knew this company on the West Coast
that had a microprocessor that implemented their system's instruction
set. He went out and made arrangements to buy this microprocessor, which
they did. When the President of the company went to Wall Street for
financing, they told him that it didn't look as if the company had
anybody that knew how to do anything with integrated circuits. They
didn't have any expertise in microprocessors and they needed that
expertise. They went out and hired the man that supposedly had been
behind the development of this microprocessor. They brought him in, and
he wasted six million dollars and didn’t come up with any new products.

When I was there, the systems were beginning to age, and they needed
something new. They decided to have an off-site meeting, and I was the
only woman there. We met in the morning. The President was there, the
Vice President of Development, the Vice President of Sales, and all the
product line managers. I was there. The Vice President of Development
began talking about COBOL and database management systems. Our systems
were designed for control applications, and one of their biggest
customers were the people that did the Link trainers for airplanes—like
Singer. I’ve forgotten who the others were. Singer was one of their
biggest customers. Theirs was strictly a FORTRAN environment. I had just
come from Interdata, which also had a powerful processor, and they were
coming out with a new FORTRAN 4 compiler, which was an optimizing
compiler that really optimized code. The customer didn’t care how long
it took to translate a program; what they wanted was for the resulting
program to run like lightning when it was really controlling a Link
trainer. Nobody cared about COBOL\! Nobody cared about database
management systems, because it was not a commercial application in any
way. It was strictly a FORTRAN environment, a scientific application,
you know. That was it\!

I didn’t say anything as they were talking about all this. My manager,
when we had a coffee break, came up to me, and he said, “You haven’t
said anything.” And I said, “Well, Sam, this is too idiotic\! I have
nothing to say to this.” Sam said, “Well, I brought you here; you’re the
only woman here. I expect you to speak. ” He goaded me to say what he
knew I’d say, and I fell for it. I decided to let ‘em have it\!
\laughs.\ I went back in and sat down and told them that our
competitors are going to eat our lunch; that our users were interested
in FORTRAN. They weren’t interested in COBOL and database management;
Interdata had a new optimizing compiler. I told them that our math
routines didn’t even work, that they didn’t give accurate answers.
Interdata, on the other hand, had had the Bureau of Standards fix up all
their math routines, and they doubled the throughput of the machine just
by fixing up the math routines\! I proceeded to tell them all of this.
There was silence in the room. The Vice President of Research and
Development was whispering in the President’s ear. I'm sure he was
saying, “She’s full of shit\! She doesn’t know what she’s talking
about.” But not a soul supported me. After the meeting, one software
person came up and said, “Yeah, you were absolutely right, but I was not
going to say anything at such a meeting.” One of the Product Line
Managers said I was a fool, and what right did I have to say these
things? But within four months, the VP of Development and his cohorts
were out\! \laughs.\ They were locked out of the building, all their
crew, and left.

In the meantime, they decided to come out with new machines. Well, they
didn’t have a new machine. We used to call it “SFC”: the Same Fucking
Computer, because they didn’t have anything—they just put new skins on
the old ones\! As head of Marketing Support, I had to do product
bulletins, and the users’ group, and the communications with the field,
and all this stuff; so I was supposed to write brochures about these
faster machines. I was beside myself, because there wasn’t anything to
write\! So I sent these product bulletins to all the Product Line
Managers, and said, “If you don’t tell me any different, this is what
I’m going to publish.” Not a one of them responded: not one responded.
So anyway, I was standing there one day by the copier, and the Vice
President of Sales came up beside me and he said, “You will have new
product bulletins for the new computers.” I said, "What new computers?"
He said, "You heard me."

**Abbate:**

Okay, so: You didn’t have the product brochures.

**Bartik:**

Well I did, but they weren’t anything other than they’d been before. I
mean, what can you say? It’s the same old machine. And they had a high
school marching band, and making this announcement . . .

You know Honeywell: one of my friends was setting up a competitive
analysis group there, so she asked me to come up and work for her, so I
quit. But, I guess it was less than a year later. Well, my boss really
made out like a bandit from this, because they turned to him to find
some machines, so he was in the catbird seat. I’m sure he had a lot of
stock options; I didn’t have that many, but I lost all but one year’s
worth, leaving. I met my ex-boss down in Phoenix, at a meeting we were
having, and Sam said, “Oh, I’ll never forget as long as I live, you
sitting there and saying, ‘Now, I’m going to tell you some anecdotes\!’”
\laughs.\ And he said, “And you know the President never forgave you
for telling him he’d pissed his money away\!” \laughs.\ He said, “He
never forgave you for doing that.” Which I’m sure is true. He didn’t
like me anyway.

It was kind of interesting—it’s interesting how men are—but this guy was
scared to death of his users: scared to death of them\! Because he felt
they would criticize him—and a lot of times they did have things to
criticize. But anyway, I was in charge of the users’ group as part of my
responsibilities, so I knew what the users wanted and what they thought.
We were going to have a users’ group meeting, and I ask him to be the
keynote speaker for lunch; and he said, “Oh, I’m not going to do that\!”
And he said, “I’ll only do it if she writes the speech.” So I said
“Fine\!” So I wrote the speech, and I started off by telling the
President that there are three things the users are interested in: one
is that you’re going to continue developing high-speed computers; two,
that you’re going to support the computers you have, with software and
everything; and three, that you’re going to upgrade the hardware and
software. And I said that’s all they’re interested in. Anyway, when he
got the speech, he said to Sam, “It is childish and naive. I’m not going
to give that speech\!” He had a finance guy that pumped up their
stock—you know how they do: they have the people that pump with the
media, and they pump pump pump. He had the guy that pumped the stock
write a speech. He took the two of these speeches. Oh, and he told Sam
he wasn’t going to answer any questions, because they’d ask him
embarrassing questions. And I said, “Sam, these people are not going to
embarrass him. They’ve laid their own career on the line to pick this
machine\! They want him to succeed; they don’t want him to fail, because
their own success rides on it. They’re not going to embarrass him\!”
Well anyway, he did give the speech—half mine and half the other one—and
then they began to ask him questions. And the questions were all easy
questions, and he was having such a good time. He had a blast, answering
these questions\! We finally had to call a halt to it, to get him off
the stage\! \laughs.\ If I’d had a stick I’d have pulled him off the
stage. He was having such a good time\!

But anyway, he just didn’t understand. He didn’t understand his users,
and actually he didn’t understand marketing: how you have to have a new
product; as soon as you get a product—before you even get a product on
the market, you’d need to be working on the next one. He didn’t
understand. He always waited until the last minute and his back was to
the wall, and then he would make a decision.

So I decided from this that I’d probably—even if I’d have been a man, I
probably wouldn’t have made it, because I noticed that the guys that
they keep are yes-men around them; they don’t want bad-news people
around them. And the surprising thing is that that’s what kills them in
the end. Honeywell: the same thing happened to that guy. And remember
Ken Olsen, at the end of his career? Ken Olsen: I used to go to the
press conferences with Ken Olsen, and I thought he was the most
wonderful person in the world.

**Abbate:**

You were working for DEC?

**Bartik:**

I was working for Auerbach—that was the publisher’s—and I would go to
the press conferences, because I wrote on all the minicomputers that
they produced; and I thought Ken Olsen walked on water, practically. But
towards the end of his career, he was surrounded by those marketing
people; they wouldn’t let him say anything. It was like he was stifled.
He’s President—and they have a hard time knowing the truth. Now, some of
them have “kitchen cabinets,” like the President’s. You haven’t heard
about the kitchen cabinet in recent years; I don’t think since
Eisenhower; but it used to always be that Presidents had kitchen
cabinets. Nixon had Rebozo. Most of them had a kitchen cabinet—you know,
some people that they can go to to tell them what’s really going on. I
know that Honeywell’s president had some; I know Isaac Auerbach did,
when I worked for him. But they have a hard time knowing what the truth
is. Now, the President of Honeywell, when he started to hire the
competitive analysis group, said that one of the things he wanted us to
do was tell how Honeywell is perceived by others. He wanted a meeting
with us, and we were to tell him how Honeywell was perceived product by
product. At first, we were each to give a presentation of over a half
hour; and then it got down to twenty minutes, and then it got down to
ten minutes, then it got down to five minutes when we had the meeting.
We met with him to tell him about the different product lines. The
marketeers around him wouldn’t let him ask us any questions\! I mean, it
was frustrating—that man was so frustrated, I don’t know why he didn’t
just fire them all. He kept saying, “But I want to ask . . . ” And they
said, “Oh, no, you have another meeting; you have to do this; you have
to do that; you have to do something else”—and pulled him right out of
there. So I came to see that Presidents of companies have a hard time
really knowing what’s going on within the company.

**Abbate:**

So you didn’t stay long at Honeywell.

**Bartik:**

Well, I stayed there. \Clancy\ Spangle, who was the President when I
went there, was basically forced out; and the reason he was forced out
was because top management lied to him. Honeywell had mainframes that
were built by G.E. in Arizona; they had the next level of business
machines that competed with the lower end of the \IBM\ 360 line, in
France; they had a group with small business computers, in Italy; and
they had minicomputers in Billerica, Massachusetts. We were at
headquarters in Minneapolis. Now, do you know “matrix management”?

**Abbate:**

No.

**Bartik:**

Well, it’s the most idiotic management scheme that I ever saw—I mean,
some few companies have got it to work. You know, the hierarchical type
is: You have a guy at the top, and he has managers beneath him who are
responsible for everybody below. Then the next level of managers are
responsible for the ones below them. So it’s pretty clear what the lines
of responsibility are.

In Matrix Management, the President had a staff in Minneapolis that
mirrored the field staff. Now in order to do anything with a product,
like minicomputers, they had competitive analysis there in the field,
and I was head of competitive analysis for minicomputers here at
headquarters. They had a Vice President of Small Computers in the field
and one back at headquarters. So there was a big staff of people, back
at headquarters, and all were supposed to keep the President advised.
Everybody advised him of what’s going on—and this gave him control of
what’s going on.

Honeywell had a policy that the field could not spend more than a
million dollars developing anything without specific instructions from
headquarters. Well, they just divided their projects up\! \laughs.\
After Spangle was forced out, the guy that eventually became President
was at this time head of North American sales—I don’t know exactly what
his positions was, but he was head of everything North American. He
despised us at headquarters, because everything he tried to do out in
the field he had to get permission for from these bozos (as far as he
was concerned) back at headquarters.

So Spangle got kicked out because Phoenix produced a large system only
20% faster than its last system. Honeywell did one thing that was very
smart, and that was: they developed multi-processor systems long before
anybody else did. They developed the software to control them, and I
think they could multiprocess maybe up to five, or something like that.
But what happened was, they didn’t develop powerful new systems, because
they were multiprocessing. Eventually their customers wanted to upgrade,
and people were coming out with processors that were two, three, four
times as fast as the last one.

Phoenix was supposed to build a new mainframe processor, and everybody
was telling how fast it was. They planned marketing for it—and it was
only twenty percent faster\! Twenty percent while other companies
developed systems several times faster than the older systems. The
field, and Spangle's people back at headquarters, lied to him. I can’t
believe they were that ignorant, but they were. Spangle left—got out—and
so then this other guy came in. His first job was to get rid of the
group back at headquarters, so I ended up, instead of having a group
there, reporting to field people. So I left.

I was offered a job with Data Decisions, which was a new publishing
company, and I was to develop a data communications product. At that
time, data communications, internetting minicomputers, was the way it
first started.

**Abbate:**

Right.

**Bartik:**

The military really had started data communications, and most of the
early people in data communications came from the military. These
companies got founded by people who learned communications while in the
army. We had a company in Cherry Hill called Infotron—and not a one of
its founders had a degree in engineering\! Every one of them had gotten
their training in the military, which was better than any college could
have done.

ARPANET was the network where they really did link computers. Back then,
all these companies had their own protocols for their own systems—like
IBM had SNA; Honeywell had DSA; UNIVAC had DCA. All of them had
protocols for all their systems, and then Ethernet was being used for
the minicomputers. When I came back to the Philadelphia area, I had a
chance to develop this communications product. I was really excited
about that.

**Abbate:**

So this was in the ‘80s at this point?

**Bartik:**

This was in 1980\.

**Abbate:**

You were really always on the cutting edge.

**Bartik:**

I was just lucky\! I just happened to be lucky. Because I was involved
with minicomputers and local area networks. I used to do a little check
on how efficient these were for local area networks, and people were so
impressed with this\! \laughs.\ Really, I just counted how much it
took to interface to the system, and put on a number of terminals, and
see what it looked like. It wasn’t that I did anything too exciting—but
at that time, because other people weren’t doing anything, they were
pretty excited. So, yes, I really enjoyed that.

So, the end of my career was in data communications.

**Abbate:**

And that was at Data Decisions?

**Bartik:**

Data Decisions, yes.

\

### Becoming a Charter Member at ACM Records

**Abbate:**

One thing I wanted to ask: You’d mentioned a couple of times going to
ACM conferences, and I had actually noticed—I found some old ACM records
from 1948 . . .

**Bartik:**

I was a charter member\!

**Abbate:**

. . . where you were a charter member. I wanted to ask you about that.

**Bartik:**

Well, they never put me as a charter member, because I think there was a
meeting before. Berkeley was from Prudential. He got Prudential to fund
UNIVAC. Berkeley was one of the moving forces behind ACM. They had had a
meeting of Stibitz, and Aiken, and Berkeley, and I don’t know who else.
Then at the first meeting, there were about forty people there. They had
a meeting at Columbia University, and Betty Snyder Holberton and I went;
and that was the founding of ACM.

**Abbate:**

And what was that for?

**Bartik:**

It was just for the distribution of knowledge. Basically there wasn’t
any other reason. No, that was all: people just wanted to know what
others were doing. They used to crowd these meetings. People would give
speeches on the “Ideal Instruction Set,” let’s say; and people would
talk about cybernetics—I mean, everybody read Cybernetics as soon as
that came out. So it was really just the distribution of knowledge.
People realized things were happening, and they had a hard time keeping
up.

**Abbate:**

Was there a sense that they were trying to raise the professional image
of programming by having these meetings?

**Bartik:**

\pause\ I don’t know; I have no idea. You’d have to ask somebody that
was more into software; because even though I started out in software, I
really wasn’t in software very long. I was much more hardware-oriented
during most of my career, after I began doing logical design. I
understood what software did, but I never programmed in any of the
languages\! I took courses in FORTRAN, ALGOL, and COBOL, and so I knew
how they worked; but I have no experience programming in them—none
whatsoever.

**Abbate:**

So really, after the ENIAC you weren’t doing a lot of programming.

**Bartik:**

No. I mean the only thing I did was, for my many computer reports, I
just did a little sample program\! \laughs.\ To test how fast the
processor was. That’s about all.

**Abbate:**

And the ACM was pretty welcoming to women?

**Bartik:**

As far as I know.

**Abbate:**

I mean, I noticed there were a number of women on the first list of
people who attended. I just wondered, because I know some of the
engineering societies seemed to be very hostile towards women.

**Bartik:**

Oh, yeah: engineers think they’re much better than programmers. They
did. I mean, computers were engineering-oriented for a long time. Like
Pres saying, “You don’t need software people; come over and do
hardware\!” \laughs.\ Which is a perfect indication of what he thought
of it\!

**Abbate:**

Right. Although he obviously didn’t think that because you were a woman,
you couldn’t do the hardware side.

**Bartik:**

Oh, no, no, no. I don’t think that at all. It was just because I was a
programmer. Yes, well, that was part of the problem with all of this.
\laughs\ I don't know whether or not they were prejudiced because I
was a woman or because I was a programmer\! Mainly, I never had trouble
with engineers, really. Even to this day, my best customers are
engineers. In fact, one of the engineers—the one that had complained
most vociferously when he found out he had to ask me and Art before he
made a change in his equipment—one day he said to me, “You must have a
beautiful marriage\!” And I said, “What do you mean?” And he said, “Oh,
you’re so logical\! My wife is so illogical.” \laughs.\ He said, “Oh,
you’re married to an engineer; you must have a beautiful life.” And I
said, “Well, Bernie, most decisions in marriage are not logical; they’re
emotional,” and that I didn’t think I had any more beautiful a marriage
than anyone else\! \laughs.\ And of course, all these so-called
“logical” people plaster over the fact that what they really want is
something emotional. I mean, it’s just plastered over.

They were very supportive of me, actually. And Bob Shaw: I mean, I had a
very warm, wonderful relationship with him for a number of years. And I
just saw Al Auerbach: UNIVAC had a 50th anniversary of the introduction
of the UNIVAC, and they had a proclamation from the mayor, and they had
lunch, and one of the guys that was there was Al Auerbach. That’s not
Isaac; no relation. Al Auerbach was an engineer on the BINAC and UNIVAC,
and he is the one who primarily got the BINAC to work. If you could ever
get him to write an article about BINAC, I advise you to do it. I’m
planning to get with him and really twist his arm. The problem is, Al
and Bob Shaw went off and formed a company called Digitronics, and then
they sold it for a bunch of money, and Al took his money, and decided to
go back to school and get his Ph.D. in biology, which he did. Then he
worked in the medical field, and he worked with a guy that got the Nobel
Prize, so that wasn’t too shabby¬\! And then he formed a little medical
company, which he ran for a while, and then he sold it. Well anyway, he
has pressures on him to write for the medical field as well as this, and
I said, “Please, please, Al: write this article about the BINAC, so the
truth gets out\!” He lives right here in Philadelphia: I advise you to
go after him, before we die\! Now, he’s in good health right now; he
just had a cataract operation, and he was telling me, “I can’t believe
it; it was so fabulous.” He said, “I didn’t know what I didn’t see
before\!” So he’s having another cataract operation to do the other one.
But he was wonderful; I was so thrilled to see him. So, IEEE really
should: if they want the true story of the BINAC, the place to get it is
Al Auerbach. You want his number?

**Abbate:**

Sure, I’ll get that from you before I go. \pause\

\

### Reflections on the Progress in the Field of Computing

**Abbate:**

How do you feel the field of computing has changed? I mean, you’ve seen
the whole thing, practically, over time.

**Bartik:**

How has it changed? Well, it’s changed considerably\! Banks couldn’t
even see any use for computers—and bankers are such far-reaching
individuals. When Pres and John went to borrow money to run their
company, banks couldn’t see how they would ever benefit from computers.
\laughs.\

How’s it changed? Miniaturization is what’s changed it\! The integrated
circuit. Because when I left the field, in the early ‘50s, they were
just starting with transistors. I remember Pres describing them to me:
how wonderful transistors were, and how they were going to change
things. And of course it did; and these photographic techniques and
everything else to miniaturize. I mean, if you didn’t do anything else
but make things smaller . . . Can you imagine, this little thing like
this \points to laptop\. In a mainframe, signals would have to go a
hundred feet\! I mean, just the fact that signals don't have to travel
so far increases the speed fantastically.

It’s the miniaturization; not only the cheapness. Now, we’d visualized
this, because Dick Tracy had a radio on his wrist; and we used to talk
about these things. We talked about computers all the time. Somebody
would say ,“And oh, so-and-so’s getting married.” “Oh, is that
right?”—and then back to computers\! \both laugh.\ It wasn’t as
though we didn’t realize another world exists; it was just that we were
so interested in this that we talked about it and speculated all the
time.

Of course, we never imagined everything that would happen. Cybernetics
came out, and we all believed that they were going to take the drudgery
of life away from a lot of us —and of course it has. My son is an
economist now, and he worries about jobs for the poor. It’s very
interesting, because everybody says, “Oh, training, training,
training\!” I mean, you train the poor, and what do you have? You have
competition for the jobs that are already there\! \laughs.\ It helps,
maybe, some individuals; but what you really need are more jobs, because
you just have competition for the jobs if you train the poor. So it’s
very interesting when we talk about taking away drudgery in jobs and
stuff like that: I mean, we do create social problems.

I find it exciting. I don’t find—Do I find any of this shocking? I do
find the Internet a little shocking, because I can’t quite figure out
how that damn thing works with nobody in charge\! \laughs.\ That’s
like Linux, this operating system with nobody in charge. I can’t quite
imagine how this works, with nobody in charge. Now, I understand there
are standard interfaces—and some interfaces are still the same ones I
wrote about, because every once in a while I run across where it tells
you what’s behind it. Yes, I find the internet puzzling. I also find it
amazing, the way they’re able to keep people from making a fool of
themselves and ruining systems. Believe me, when I see what some of the
real estate agents do, I could scream\! They will get in and change the
company’s password. One agent got on, and I don’t know how he got into
the system, but he got in so that everybody went in under his name. Then
he called up and complained because he couldn’t use the system because
his name was busy. He was the one that had done it so that everybody
that wanted to get on the computer went in under his name\! I mean, how
did he get in? He got in the innards and put his name in. And believe
me, he’s ignorant of computers\! But every once in a while, these people
get to the internal workings; somehow there is a glitch that allows them
to get in, and I find that amazing.

Now, the biggest fear I have is the fact that software’s not tested. And
Star Wars scares the hell out of me. When I was product line manager for
the Megamini at Interdata, we had an operating system that worked very
well. Then we developed a memory management system. We started shipping
the memory management system to people, and they started installing it
and using it. All of a sudden their computers were going all to pieces.
We found out what the problem was. The problem was that the system
increased the program counter before the software calculated where the
block of data was to go in memory. It worked fine until it came to a
boundary, and then at the boundary slipped into the bank of memory
beside the one it was supposed to be in. It meant that we had to change
when we increased the program counter. That fix took over a hundred cuts
and straps on the board to get the changes made\! \laughs.\ Anyway,
nobody checks all the possibilities of the software. I mean, a system
could be doing calculations in an absolutely crucial situation, and it
reaches one of the situations that wasn’t tested, and it doesn’t work\!
It could do almost anything. And I don’t think anybody in the software
business wants Star Wars. I don’t think anybody wants it. They just
don’t understand. That’s really my biggest fear about what’s going to
happen.

What happens to our kids when they start out in computers? My campus is
now all electronic; every room has its own computer.

**Abbate:**

In Missouri.

**Bartik:**

Yes. Every dorm room: they all have exactly the same software; same
computer; they only pay $170 a year.

**Abbate:**

Do you think the culture of computing has changed?

**Bartik:**

Well, I’m sure the people at Microsoft worry about stock options and all
that crap a lot more. We certainly didn’t in my era; I mean, I got stock
options at \only\ one company that I worked for. Twenty percent of
Microsoft employees are millionaires.

I spent some time with them. Microsoft’s such a big company. It’s so
different: the culture of a big company and the culture of a small
company are so different.

Has computing changed? I’m sure the problems for the ages are still out
there. The funny thing is, John Mauchly thought about a computer because
of predicting the weather, and they still don’t know how to predict the
weather. So many of these problems of the ages, they haven’t solved them
yet.

The one thing, though, that I think we all speculated about, and
everybody has for so many years, is travel in space. Now, I don’t think
we’ll ever have travel in space until somebody comes up with something
totally new, because I don’t think, with our current technology, that we
really can travel in space.

**Abbate:**

But is it new computer technology? Or other types of technology?

**Bartik:**

I don’t know. I mean, have you ever taken a marketing course?

**Abbate:**

No.

**Bartik:**

Well, in marketing they talk about the “expanding puddle” or the “big
drop theory.” Now, most companies do the “expanding puddle”: that is,
the software gets better, the hardware gets better, the product gets
better, the sales force gets better—and so it spreads like that. Now,
the “drop theory” is: something drops out here that’s totally away from
the puddle. So you start something that’s really new. And I think
somebody is really going to have to come up with something totally new
for us to travel in space with any amount of ease. Who knows what it
will be? I don’t know. I have no idea what it would be, but I can
visualize that this is what happens. Everybody goes along thinking in
one direction, and then here’s a genius out here that everybody’s
ignoring, who’s thinking about something totally different, that makes
the difference\! I’m sure we’ll just keep getting faster and better and,
you know, the expanding puddle.

**Abbate:**

I guess.
\pause\

\

### Reflections on the Progress of Women in the Field of Computing and Career in Computing

**Abbate:**

Do you get the impression that it’s gotten easier for women to get into
computing?

**Bartik:**

No, I don’t think so. I was speaking at ACM: there’s a women’s group of
ACM, and I was going out to speak; I was on a panel or something. And
the day before, I came in and I went down the hall and was looking at
what they were doing little seminars on. There was this room where the
women were packed and out in the hall—standing out in the hall—so I
looked to see what the seminar was, and it was “Coping With the Glass
Ceiling.”

There’s a very interesting book that I read about what happened to the
first Harvard Business School class that included women? Have you seen
or read that?

**Abbate:**

I haven’t read it, but I’ve heard about it.

**Bartik:**

More than 20 percent of the class was women, and so what she did was to
follow what all of them had done. And actually, only one had it all. One
was probably going to be CEO: she did not marry, did not have children;
she socialized primarily with people like herself. The one that had it
all just happened to be lucky. She was married to a consultant who could
live anywhere, because his consultancy was so wide he didn’t really have
a home base. She had children. Her company wanted her to move to New
York to advance, and he just moved with her\! So this woman was the only
one that had it all. Now the others, most of them, weren’t even working;
whatever they were doing, it was really just very modest. I mean, it was
very disappointing, actually, what happened to them.

**Abbate:**

Did you find it an issue trying to have a career and a family?

**Bartik:**

Oh, yes\! My husband’s a male chauvinist pig\! I mean, I’m divorced.
It’s interesting: he used to always tell me I was fighting a war that
was already won, about women.

**Abbate:**

Hmm..

**Bartik:**

And I grew up with male chauvinist pigs in my family. The one thing my
father and my family never said, which I didn’t tell you, was that men
were smarter than women: never. I’d never even heard it. I was never,
never given any indication that I couldn’t learn anything I wanted to.
But I never had any money, and the reason I didn’t was because my father
did provide for the boys. The view was that someday they were going to
have a family and have to support a family, while you would marry
somebody and your husband would support you. \laughs.\

Now, my husband had his problems, in terms of being a male chauvinist
pig. He grew up with a disapproving father and a doting mother. I still
see him, because he’s married and lives close to my daughter, and I see
him and his wife when I go out there for Christmas. I think he really
believed that I wanted to do whatever he wanted to do—that whatever he
wanted, I wanted. And I think that came from his doting mother. He would
say, “Oh, no, you don’t mean it.” I’d say, “Yes I do; I hate this\!”
\laughs.\ And I think he really thought I was kidding. And I think
it’s not just being a male chauvinist pig; I mean it was this
particular environment that he grew up with. The other thing: he was a
manic-depressive, and so when he was manic I was the wife that he took
care of, then when he was depressed, I was to be superwoman and take
care of everything. So he alternated between making me superwoman and
making me helpless. But that I blame on his emotional make-up, as much
as anything.

I don’t know of any women that I would like to trade places with. I
mean, it’s pathetic, isn’t it, that I’ve really only been involved with
two men in all my life: two\! Now, since I was divorced, I’ve been in
singles programs and met hundreds of men—and I see no marriages that I
would want. And I think it’s pretty pathetic, because I think men in our
society are ruined. It’s also my prejudice, too. I mean I’m prejudiced
too, with my bias, saying I never wanted to get married. It’s been very
interesting, because I never wanted to get married and never wanted to
have children, but my relationship with my children has been the
greatest thing that ever happened to me\! I adore all three of them and
loved taking care of them when they were little. But I still don’t think
much of marriage\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Well, you mentioned your aunt—I forgot the name . . .

**Bartik:**

Gretchen.

**Abbate:**

. . . who was, I guess, maybe one role model for you; and she had never
married and had children.

**Bartik:**

She did marry, when she was 40\!

**Abbate:**

Oh, but when you were little . . .

**Bartik:**

When I was little she wasn’t married.

**Abbate:**

Did you have other people who were role models or mentors for you?

**Bartik:**

Yes, Dr. Blanche Dow: She was my teacher in college. Actually I only had
three college professors who meant anything to me—and I don’t think you
need any more, really: Dr. Hake, who said, “I’m head of the Math
Department and I’ll give you the courses\!” Dr. Horsfal, who really
changed my life in the way he made me start using my mind; and then Dr.
Blanche Dow. When you’re in school they have you take cultural courses
that pass on the culture. They called them Humanities in my college.
These courses told us about art and music and social science and all the
things that were supposed to make us cultured people. Well, Dr. Dow
taught those courses, plus she also taught French. She was a little,
dynamic woman, and I was really intrigued, because at that time I never
thought much about art, music, or any of those things. The fact that she
enjoyed them and believed they were important made me think, “Oh, I
really should find out about this, if Dr. Dow thinks so.”

I took French with her. This is kind of an interesting story. We were in
French class one day, and we were talking about farm subsidies. She
started talking and complaining about farm subsidies, and I got so mad—I
was really mad. I said, “Yeah, the farmers: When we have a big crop, the
price is low, and we don’t make any money; and, when we don’t have any
crop, the price is high, so we don’t have anything to sell\!” And I
said, “No matter what you say, we have to have money to buy clothes, to
buy machinery; we have to buy things.” And she said, “Well, I certainly
wish that I could have a big, fat chicken any time I wanted\!” \both
laugh.\ Oh, I was mad at her\! I was really mad. So I went home that
weekend and asked my mother to dress a chicken for her. So I took her a
chicken\! \laughs.\

About 1950 I was in Washington, and I walked across the street to the
cafeteria to have some lunch, and who should walk in but Doctor Blanche
Dow\! She was standing in line, so I went up to talk to her. She had
left my college and become President of Coty College in South Missouri.
She told me how she spent most of her time fund-raising. She was in
Washington for a meeting because she was President of the American
Association of University Women. She tried to talk me into joining.
Finally she said to me, “Remember the time you brought me the chicken?”
\laughs.\

So yes, she was my role model, Blanche Dow. She was a lesbian, by the
way. She was really a fabulous woman, and that was it\! Yes, she was a
role model.

**Abbate:**

Do you have any advice for young women who might be thinking of going
into computing?

**Bartik:**

Well, I think people should always do what they want to do. I think that
a job takes up too much of your life to do something you don’t like to
do. And I’m sure that there are lots of good things about it and lots of
bads things about it. There are so many different computer jobs. My
daughter is in the business, too. But I really believe you should do
what you want to do: what you enjoy doing and what you can do well. Most
people don’t like to do things if they don’t do them well. I just
believe, “When opportunity knocks, open the door.” But you’ve got to be
prepared. It doesn’t do you any good to talk yourself into a job you
can’t do; that is just courting disaster. So I think you should be
prepared, and work hard—everybody that succeeds must work hard—and open
the door when opportunity knocks. Opportunity comes in a lot of
different ways. But I do believe that you should enjoy what you do.

No, I don’t really have any advice. I mean, it depends on what you
like\! I’m in the real estate business now, but believe me: I’d much
rather work with things than with people\! \laughs.\ They drive me
crazy at times\! And I’m not that good. I used to think when I worked
with engineers—because I was so much more of a "people" person than they
were—that I was great with people; but in comparison with sales people,
no. I’m not a "people" person; I’m a "thing" person.

There’s another thing: I took the Myers-Briggs test. Have you ever taken
Myers-Briggs?

**Abbate:**

No.

**Bartik:**

I thought it was the most insightful thing that ever happened to me.
When I decided I was going to get out of publishing and go into
marketing and sales for a minicomputer company, I went to Bernard
Haldane’s, which is a consultancy for job hunting, basically. They’re
not a placement bureau; they just teach you how to network and job hunt.
My particular mentor was a physicist—Ph.D. physicist—who had had his own
company. He had had a serious heart attack, and couldn’t really pursue
that any more, so he was working at Bernard Haldane’s. One of the things
they did was to give me the Myers-Briggs personality test. They took it
very seriously: knowing what you are, and knowing what other people are
and knowing how to work with them. One of the things they taught me
about going to a meeting. The first thing I was to do was to determine
what personality everybody has. Then I wasn't to give a thinking
argument to a "feeler," or vice-versa. I wasn't to try to get a
perceptive person to make a judgment, because they’re not that way. I
was to understand that introverts can internalize things and make
decisions. I found out what I was, and I realized that in my career up
to then, I had always thought "sensers" were stupid, because I’m
"intuitive," and I would go from A to E—and a senser goes, “A, B, C, . .
. ” They used to drive me crazy. I had to go through all of the steps
and I had to wait for them\! The other thing I thought was that
"non-judgmental" people, "perceptive" people, were weak—because I
thought, “If you had any balls at all, you’d make a judgment\!”
\laughs.\ But that’s not the way they work. Also, I’m an extrovert,
and there’s no way in the world that I could ever come up with
conclusions that meant much to me unless I tested them in the outside
world. That’s basically the difference between an introvert and an
extrovert. I thought that was one of the most valuable things I learned.

When I was just back at Maryville, they had me meet with the head of an
academic academy they have there for high school students to come to
college. Do I disagree with it\! They brought 30 kids in from area high
schools, and the students go in math and science and all their other
courses; but they just live within themselves and talk to other geeks\!
“Well, what do you do for recreation?” “Well, just hang around with
the other people.” I mean, there’s more to life than the intellectual
life\! I think those kids need to meet with their peers that are not
like them, because we have to learn to get along with people we don’t
like—and people that are very different from us are very interesting at
times. I have very little artistic talent, but God do I love to see
artists at work\! And music—I couldn’t carry a tune in a bucket, but
that doesn’t mean that I can’t appreciate music. I don’t know. I just
feel that young people should develop the things that they’re good at
and that they enjoy doing.

It’s like real estate, by the way: You cannot buy a house with logic and
reason. If you do, you’re never happy in the house. You must buy a house
emotionally, I really believe that. You must buy it because it satisfies
you emotionally. Now, if you have a good real estate agent, the agent is
going to make sure that it’s not a bad real estate investment; obviously
you do not want to do that. That’s one of the reasons why it’s important
to have a good real estate agent—so they don’t let you piss your money
away—but you really need to buy it emotionally so that it satisfies you.
You want to be happy when you drive up to the house; happy when you open
the front door. You like the way it feels and looks. So I think the same
thing is true about a career: you like the way it feels.

**Abbate:**

What aspects of your work with computers have you found the most
satisfying?

**Bartik:**

The most wonderful job I had was on UNIVAC. And then the second-most was
on ENIAC, because it was new. I made this statement to Isaac Auerbach
\laughs\. I worked for him for nine years, and Isaac came in before I
left and said, “I never thought you’d leave me.” And I said, “Well, you
haven’t done anything with me for four years. I mean, I’ve been here
doing the same thing, so why wouldn’t I leave?” Anyway, when I got up to
make my farewell speech—they gave me a gift, and I was supposed to make
a speech—I said, “Well, they say two of the happiest days of your life
are the day you take a job and the day you leave a job.” And I said,
“Today is the second happiest day of my life\!” \laughs.\ And I
think everybody is all excited, when you do something new.

I liked the prestige. I had prestige. I guess I didn’t have any prestige
at Honeywell, but certainly in the publishing business I did. I think
most people like to have some recognition for what they do, and they
like to have people appreciate what they do. And the funny thing is:
Pres or John never said that to you, but you just knew they did\! It’s
interesting that you don’t have to say, “I think you’re wonderful”—you
just act as though they’re wonderful, I guess\! \laughs.\ I’m not
quite sure how it works.

**Abbate:**

I should thank you for spending all this time with me\! Unless there’s
anything else you think I’ve left out.

**Bartik:**

Not that I know of, really. You didn’t ask me much about Johnny von
Neumann, but that’s all right.

**Abbate:**

Should I?

**Bartik:**

You didn’t ask me about Herman, and what I think of him.

**Abbate:**

I think I’ve already heard\!

**Bartik:**

It was kind of interesting, Herman was a Ph.D. mathematician. Adele and
I worked together on a program for a Dr. \Abraham\ Taub up at
Princeton. Adele wrote all the manuals for the ENIAC, but, of course,
they didn’t come out until after everybody had already learned how to
program it. She was a very smart woman. She and I worked on the Taub
program, and Herman had already gone up to Princeton to work with von
Neumann. He came home at night, and he wanted her to hurry up and get
this job done so she could go up to Princeton with him. We used to have
dinner with him at night. I never once heard him make a technical,
valuable remark. All he ever did was manipulate people. He was a
manipulator.

**Abbate:**

Was he doing anything technical for the ENIAC? I thought he was sort of
managing . . .

**Bartik:**

He was a liaison, although he claims he did \technical work\—and for
the EDVAC, too; why would he be on the patent? He attended the meetings.
In fact, Douglas Hartree was here one summer—he was teaching out at
Haverford College, lecturing—so the Goldstines invited us up for dinner.
So we went up there for dinner, and I said something about Herman being
an assistant of von Neumann. He hit the roof\! “I’m not an assistant to
von Neumann\!” I said, “Well, how come you’re at the Institute?” So he
said, “I’m here because I’m being honored for the work I did during the
war\!” Well, that is true to some extent, because most of the
mathematicians that worked at Aberdeen were given three months at
Princeton, at the Institute. You know, Einstein was there at that time,
and Veblen, and von Neumann; there were a lot of people there. I mean,
they even had tea with Einstein, for God’s sakes\! \laughs.\ So they
were given three months. But that wasn’t true \about Goldstine’s
situation\. So anyway, Douglas Hartree, when we were on the way back,
said, “Oh well, it doesn’t matter what he says: that’s what he is.”
\laughs.\

But anyway, Adele I loved. So we were working on that project—we really
worked hard—and she said, “Oh well, he always gets me these jobs and
then complains when I do them\!” \laughs.\ She died of cancer very
early on in life. But I think she was brighter than he was, frankly. She
was his student at the University of Michigan—or was she Chicago? I
think it was the University of Chicago.

**Abbate:**

I’d like to know more about her. I mean, she was active in computing, as
far as I know, until she died.

**Bartik:**

Well, she did these little jobs. I guess she must have taught Klara von
Neumann to program the ENIAC.

Retrieved from
"<http:/ethw.org/index.php?title=Oral-History:Jean_Bartik&oldid=108405>"

Categories(Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* Computing and
  electronics(Category:Computing_and_electronics "Category:Computing and electronics")
* Workplace(Category:Workplace "Category:Workplace")
* People and
  organizations(Category:People_and_organizations "Category:People and organizations")

## Contents

* 1 About Jean Bartik(#About_Jean_Bartik)
* 2 About the Interview(#About_the_Interview)
* 3 Copyright Statement(#Copyright_Statement)
* 4 Interview(#Interview)
  * 4\.1 Growing up in Rural Missouri(#Growing_up_in_Rural_Missouri)
  * 4\.2 College Years(#College_Years)
  * 4\.3 A Father's Influence(#A_Father.27s_Influence)
  * 4\.4 Graduating College and Leaving
    Missouri(#Graduating_College_and_Leaving_Missouri)
  * 4\.5 Reflections on ENIAC and Beginning of Career at
    Aberdeen(#Reflections_on_ENIAC_and_Beginning_of_Career_at_Aberdeen)
  * 4\.6 Building Relationships: The Women of ENIAC and
    Aberdeen(#Building_Relationships:_The_Women_of_ENIAC_and_Aberdeen)
  * 4\.7 Understanding ENIAC(#Understanding_ENIAC)
  * 4\.8 Working with J.Presper Eckert and John
    Mauchly(#Working_with_J.Presper_Eckert_and_John_Mauchly)
  * 4\.9 Working with others on the ENIAC
    project(#Working_with_others_on_the_ENIAC_project)
  * 4\.10 Los Alamos and ENIAC, 1945(#Los_Alamos_and_ENIAC.2C_1945)
  * 4\.11 From ENIAC to UNIVAC(#From_ENIAC_to_UNIVAC)
  * 4\.12 Reflections on Dick Clippinger and the McCarthy
    Era(#Reflections_on_Dick_Clippinger_and_the_McCarthy_Era)
  * 4\.13 Reflections on the EDVAC Report and the Transition from ENIAC
    to
    EDVAC(#Reflections_on_the_EDVAC_Report_and_the_Transition_from_ENIAC_to_EDVAC)
  * 4\.14 BINAC and UNIVAC(#BINAC_and_UNIVAC)
  * 4\.15 Family Life & Coming Back into the
    Business(#Family_Life_.26_Coming_Back_into_the_Business)
  * 4\.16 Touring and Speaking at
    Microsoft(#Touring_and_Speaking_at_Microsoft)
  * 4\.17 Working with Grace Hopper(#Working_with_Grace_Hopper)
  * 4\.18 Reflections on Women in Technology & the
    Workplace(#Reflections_on_Women_in_Technology_.26_the_Workplace)
  * 4\.19 Becoming a Charter Member at ACM
    Records(#Becoming_a_Charter_Member_at_ACM_Records)
  * 4\.20 Reflections on the Progress in the Field of
    Computing(#Reflections_on_the_Progress_in_the_Field_of_Computing)
  * 4\.21 Reflections on the Progress of Women in the Field of
    Computing and Career in
    Computing(#Reflections_on_the_Progress_of_Women_in_the_Field_of_Computing_and_Career_in_Computing)

![Powered by
MediaWiki(resources/assets/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)](//www.mediawiki.org/)
![Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki(extensions/SemanticMediaWiki/includes/../resources/images/smw_button.png)](https://www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 21 November 2014, at 10:44\.

* This page has been accessed 6,025 times.

* About ETHW(ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* Policies and disclaimers(ETHW:Policies "ETHW:Policies")

