Toggle navigation   

[ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki](/Main_Page)

* [** Go ****]()
  * [Browse by Subject](/ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * [Encyclopedia](/Encyclopedia)
  
  * [Oral Histories](/Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * [First Hand Histories](/First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * [Landmarks/Milestones](/Landmarks)
  
  * [Archives](/Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * [Education](/ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * [Random page](/Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * [Help](/Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * [Contact us](/Special:Contact)
  
  * 
  * [Recent changes](/Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * [New pages](/Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* [** Actions ****]()
  * [View
    source](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Karen_Shipp&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]")
  
  * [History](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Karen_Shipp&action=history "Past revisions of this page [h]")
  
  * 
  * [Oral-History](/Oral-History:Karen_Shipp)
  
  * [Discussion](/index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Karen_Shipp&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page [t]")
  
  * 
* [** Tools ****]()
  * [What links
    here](/Special:WhatLinksHere/Oral-History:Karen_Shipp "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]")
  
  * [Related
    changes](/Special:RecentChangesLinked/Oral-History:Karen_Shipp "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]")
  
  * [Special
    pages](/Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages [q]")
  
  * [Printable
    version](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Karen_Shipp&printable=yes "Printable version of this page [p]")
  
  * [Permanent
    link](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Karen_Shipp&oldid=113057 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * [Page
    information](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Karen_Shipp&action=info)
  
  * [Browse properties](/Special:Browse/Oral-2DHistory:Karen_Shipp)
* [** Account ****](# "Account")
  * [Log
    in](/index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3AKaren+Shipp)
  
  * 
  * [Request account](/Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Karen Shipp

## About Karen Shipp

Karen Shipp has worked in Software Development for over twenty years. A
graduate of Oxford University, 1974, her original career had nothing to
do with computers. Using a government grant she went back to school in
the mid-1980s and graduated from North London Polytechnic. Since then,
she has spent the majority of her career working at Open University,
Milton Keynes. Originally, she worked as a software developer for
educational materials but since 2000 she has been a researcher for the
OU systems group. In 2002, she began a research project with Magus
Remus, which culminated in the publication by Springer in 2009 of their
book: Systems Thinkers about key developers of systems thinking, and
their work.

In this interview she discusses her different careers, including the
years when she was not working in computers. It goes into detail for her
research interests, Java, Flash, and Systems. The interview ends with a
discussion of her future and where she sees the field developing.

## About the Interview

KAREN SHIPP: An interview conducted by Janet Abbate for the IEEE History
Center, September 11, 2001\.

Interview \#626 for the IEEE History, The Institute of Electrical and
Electronic Engineers, Inc.

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
the IEEE History Center Oral History Program, IEEE History Center at
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ
07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include identification of
the specific passages to be quoted, anticipated use of the passages, and
identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Karen Shipp: an oral history conducted in 2001 by Karen Shipp, IEEE
History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

## Interview

INTERVIEW: Karen Shipp\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: September 11, 2001\
PLACE: Karen Shipp’s office at the Open University, Milton Keynes

### Family and Early Years

**Abbate:**

This is an interview with Karen Shipp on September 11, 2001\.

Okay, I always start out by asking: When were you born and where did you
grow up?

**Shipp:**

I was born in 1952, and I grew up in Bromley, which is a suburb of
London.

**Abbate:**

What did your parents do for a living?

**Shipp:**

My father was a bank clerk, and he was a part-time fireman. My mother
was an artist, and she still works as an artist. She’s 79\! \[laughs.\]
It’s interesting: she designs the images on the tapestries that wealthy
women have made in one-off designs, and it’s actually very like
pixels—the cells of the tapestry—and it sort of amuses me, because
it’s a little bit like working the computer screen.

**Abbate:**

Does she use computers to design these?

**Shipp:**

No, no.

**Abbate:**

And she worked throughout your childhood?

**Shipp:**

Yes. She always worked at home.

**Abbate:**

I guess you had a model of a working woman and a working mother. Did you
expect to work or have a career when you grew up?

**Shipp:**

Yes, I did. I should say, before my mother was married, she worked for
Science Films, and she worked in the very early days of animation. I
think Mary Field was one of the first women who worked on that; I can’t
remember the names now. Science Films did the very early time-lapse
photography. I guess she talked about that, and I guess in my family, my
mother was the more intelligent—or at least that was the family story
\[laughs\]—of the two. So I certainly grew up not thinking that men were
more intelligent than women, which is a kind of underlying assumption a
lot of people do have.

I guess—yes, I assumed that I would work, but I didn’t think very much
about it.

**Abbate:**

Were you exposed to the science aspect of the science films? Did you
ever see the films she worked on?

**Shipp:**

No. No, I had an older brother who was absolutely mad about electronics,
and he used to mend radios and things when he was about ten. So at that
age, I thought of that as boys’ stuff. I thought of physical, electrical
things as boys’ stuff. I guess the reason I moved towards science was
that I went to a grammar school: we had selection in those days, so I
went to state school that was a good school, and luckily for me, the
science and maths teacher was very good. It was an all-girls’ school,
and I was sort of discovered in about the third year by the maths
teacher and the chemistry teacher, and they both decided I was very
bright. It wasn’t really a choice; it was just that we discovered that I
could do maths very easily, and physics—mainly because of the maths. So
when it came to deciding on a degree, it was just what I was good at. I
was quite interested in physics, so I did a physics degree at Oxford. I
was quite interested in physics, but I was also really interested in
people and why people behave as they do and think as they do and feel as
they do—and that’s always been a thread that’s been quite a strong
thread, really.

**Abbate:**

Interesting. So, before you were sort of discovered by your teachers—and
that was when you were about 14?

**Shipp:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

Had you had an interest in maths and science? Did you think of yourself
as being interested in that, as a child?

**Shipp:**

No\! \[laughs.\] No, I thought—I mean, when I was small, I thought I was
going to be a ballet dancer or an artist\! \[laughs.\] And even at about
13, 14, I remember . . . Because my parents didn’t have a lot of family
friends; we didn’t have a lot of people who visited the house. They were
quite different personalities, and there weren’t family friends that I
could talk to about different careers, and I didn’t know very much about
different jobs and different careers, and they weren’t really able to
advise. And I remember my father trying to advise me, and the only
things he could think of—well, his best idea was that I should work for
fire brigade, and be the woman on the end of the telephone who had a
little map with the flags, and you know, decides which vehicle should go
where\! And I thought that I wanted to work in an office, because I knew
that they had office parties. \[laughs.\] So I didn’t \[know\] at all,
at that age. It was more what I happened to be good at that kind of
drove the direction, in a way.

**Abbate:**

And did your teachers at school, who saw that you had these talents: Did
they suggest any specific way you might employ them in a job after
leaving school?

**Shipp:**

No, no. They were just—they were all quite keen toward their subject;
and in fact I gave up chemistry during the sixth form, and the chemistry
master was really sad\! During the sixth form, I did—You could pay to go
to some place in London and talk to a psychologist, and do some
psychometric tests for careers advice; so I went and did that. It was
very, very early days of computing, and so I don’t think that would even
have been on their list of things they advise people to do.

**Abbate:**

Because this would be around the late ‘60s or early ‘70s.

**Shipp:**

Yes: It was late ‘60s. So they sort of said science, or accountancy,
or—for some reason, he was quite keen that I should be a factory
inspector\! \[laughs.\]

### Attending Oxford

**Abbate:**

But you ended up going to Oxford.

**Shipp:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

Were your teachers thinking that you should go to college?

**Shipp:**

Yes. Yes. Well, I guess those of us who were doing A-levels, it was just
somehow assumed that we’d apply to university. We didn’t normally send
people to Oxford and Cambridge, because it was like a different system:
you had to do a special exam at a different time, and usually that
involved staying on an extra term after A-levels. But somebody was
asking if anyone wanted to apply, and they came and asked me directly,
and I thought that was hilarious, and I went home and told my
mother—because I sort of thought of it as a place that only posh
people went to, so I told my mother, because I thought it would amuse
her. But she picked up on the idea, and she tried to attract me to the
idea of going by getting books out of the library about what fun it was,
what a lot of good social activities there were. I discussed it with the
physics master, and he said, “You can do whatever you want,” in a sort
of encouraging way. So then I thought I might as well do it. I quite
enjoyed doing exams, and it wasn’t a great cost. I applied in the first
year of sixth form, and I had an interview, and I really loved the place
when I went there and interviewed. And in fact I didn’t get in that
year; I was put on the waiting list, and I got in the following year.

**Abbate:**

Were you surprised to get in?

**Shipp:**

No\! I don’t know. Not by then, I guess; not by then.

**Abbate:**

Had you applied to other places as a backup?

**Shipp:**

Yes.

It was funny: By the time you get there, you’ve jumped these hurdles,
and also you’ve become the brightest person—or seen as one of the
brightest few—in your school; and then you’re suddenly with all these
other people who are just as bright or brighter, and that’s a kind of
shock, in a way\! \[laughs.\]

### First experiences with Computers

**Abbate:**

Did you enjoy it, though?

**Shipp:**

Yes. I didn’t especially enjoy the physics. While I was at school I
thought, because I was good at maths, that it was theoretical physics
that I would enjoy; and I didn’t realize how theoretical it could get\!
I actually think I would have probably been happier doing something even
more practical, like engineer or architecture. \[Physics\] just didn’t
have the sort of practical sort of footholds to make it interesting.
There was absolutely no way of applying it to real life or to people. It
just didn’t capture my interest. So, I did it, and I got a Second, but I
actually felt when I finished my degree that I knew less. I felt that
I’d known more when I’d finished my A-levels than when I finished my
degree\! \[laughs.\]

The first bit of computing I did was before I went to university. I had
nine months off, and I decided that because this wasn’t my career—this
was before my career—I could do anything that I wanted, and what I was
really interested in was psychiatry and psychology. So I looked up in
the phone book and found that the Medical Research Council had a Social
Psychiatry Unit that was not that far from where I lived, so I wrote to
them, and they made a post for me. It was a really exciting time,
because they were just starting to use computers. The chap that was
running the unit was Professor John Wing, and at the time he was
exploring a computer diagnosis system. So I did, first of all, just
clerical work on his data, using something called a counter-sorter—where
you put punch-cards in, and it sorted them according to where the holes
were punched—with his data. This project was called CATEGO. Later, when
I came back and worked again on the edges of psychiatry, I discovered
that the sort of diagnostic hierarchy that he developed in order to
write this software had become a standard and was really well known. So
that was quite a surprise\!

While I was working there, an American called Bob Hirschfeld came over
to do a Bayesian analysis on this data. It was a World Health
Organization project, and he’d got psychiatric data from about thirteen
different centers across the world: he’d got the whole hierarchy of
symptoms and syndromes, and he’d also got the diagnosis that was made in
that country. \[John Wing\] was using a sort of logical framework to
arrive at a diagnosis and to compare the computer diagnosis with the
medical diagnosis, but Bob Hirschfeld wanted to do a statistical
analysis just based on probabilities of whether, given this set of
symptoms, you’d end up having that diagnosis; and he wanted to compare
that, as a diagnostic method, with this logical one. He was programming
that in [FORTRAN](/FORTRAN "FORTRAN"), and he didn’t manage to finish
before his fees ran out and he had to go back, and so they asked me to
finish off his project—which meant I had to learn FORTRAN in a few days
\[laughs\], before he went\!

**Abbate:**

Probably not what you expected\!

**Shipp:**

They did have a computer at the Institute of Psychiatry, where we were
based, but the main MRC computing unit was in Pentonville Road, in
another part of London, and so I was based in the two places, and I had
a desk at the computer unit. It was batch programming, so it was all
punch cards, and you put them in an in-tray and then, if you were lucky,
the next day your printout would come back—and you’d find that you’d
left out a semicolon, and you’d have to go back, change that card, and
put it in again; so it was very, very slow. I had his program, and I
basically I had to debug it and run it on this data. Eventually, when
I’d done that, because I could program then, Professor Wing just got
me to do things like analyzing data in different ways: plotting this
against that.

But another interesting thing is that the other things that were going
on in that unit: One of them was something I was allowed to play with,
just before I left. Although all of computing was batch processing, they
had a sort of teletype machine, where there was this one program where
you could type in things, and a response would come up on the teletype.
It was a mock psychiatrist.

**Abbate:**

Was that like Eliza?

“Shipp:”

It was Eliza\!

**Abbate:**

Oh, it was Eliza.

**Shipp:**

As far as I was concerned, it was a sort of game; it was a sort of joke
that somebody was developing for fun. I thought at the time that it was
a chap there who had written it, but I discovered that Eliza’s really
famous, and it was one of the first examples of so-called “AI.”

**Abbate:**

Yes, I’ve forgotten who . . .

**Shipp:**

You know about this?

**Abbate:**

I don’t know exactly who it was, but it’s well known. There are all
sorts of anecdotes about people actually telling their troubles to the
computer\!

**Shipp:**

Yes, yes.

**Abbate:**

Was the diagnostic application you were doing—would you consider that
AI? Or an expert system, or something?

**Shipp:**

I guess it was trying to be. I would describe it as an expert system.
But obviously that terminology didn’t exist at the time.

**Abbate:**

Was there a different term at the time?

**Shipp:**

My impression was that everything was seen as a one-off. People hadn’t
started trying to classify things into those sorts of types.

**Abbate:**

It sounds like it was very cutting-edge for the time.

**Shipp:**

Yes, I think it must have been. There wasn’t this sort of macho,
we’re-terribly-intelligent-and-at-the-forefront feeling about the
people who were in it at all, which I think you do get now. I’ve got a
friend who works in AI, and he says whenever people ask him what he
does, that it’s quite predictable that people will say, “Gosh, you must
be terribly intelligent\!” \[laughs.\] There is that sort of image about
it now. But then, it was much more like people rolling their sleeves up
and getting their hands dirty, and playing, or trying things out, and
they were just engrossed in it. Well, the Eliza thing was just fun,
really; and the diagnostic thing was because he was passionately
interested in psychiatry, I guess, and then maybe doing something
useful. It wasn’t that the interest and focus was in computing and what
you could do with a computer. That was my impression—but I was kind of
quite a lowly person.

**Abbate:**

It sounds like you enjoyed working there.

**Shipp:**

Yes.

### Computers and Education at Oxford

**Abbate:**

Did you take to the computer right away, and think “This is something I
might be interested in?”

**Shipp:**

Well . . . I took to programming in FORTRAN because it was very—I could
see the ways in which it was familiar to algebra, and that seemed
logical and straightforward and made sense. But it was so slow—this
having to wait a couple of days, and then, you know, there was some tiny
slip that you’d made—that the actual computing was quite boring. \[There
was\] just so much time having to wait that I didn’t really want more of
that. The focus was really on the subject matter.

So when I got to Oxford, there wasn’t computer science, in those days,
but there was the possibility of doing a term of computing as a sort of
extra option: you didn’t get any credit for it, and it wasn’t instead of
anything else; it was just extra. So I didn’t bother to do it, and I
didn’t know anybody who did it, even; there wasn’t that enthusiasm or
sense that “This is where the future lies, and if you know about it
you’ll become rich and powerful.” It was more, “This is really rather
mundane and boring to actually do, though it’s got some potential.”

**Abbate:**

So you didn’t use the computers for your class work.

**Shipp:**

No, no. No, I mean, the facilities were very, very limited, and the only
way you could have got at a computer was to do this option; and I think
you would have written one program and put it in and eventually got some
output, and I felt I’d done that and didn’t really want any more of it.

**Abbate:**

I guess you were probably less likely to take the course, having
actually experienced batch processing.

**Shipp:**

Yes, I think so.

**Abbate:**

So, you went ahead and got the physics degree, but it doesn’t sound like
you were very enthusiastic about physics at that point.

**Shipp:**

That’s right\! Yes.

**Abbate:**

So you weren’t planning to go on in physics?

**Shipp:**

Well, I assumed that I would, but I wanted to work—I wanted to find
something interesting to do with it. I’d had a summer job, at a
different Medical Research Council unit, of bioengineering, and that was
really interesting. That was using Doppler ultrasound to look at aortic
blood flow. The people were really, really nice and fun. It was headed
by Heinz Wolfe, who in this country became quite well known as a
television innovative person. So I was interested in bioengineering and
medical physics, and I got a job as a medical physicist in Scotland,
doing diagnostic ultrasound. It was quite early days of diagnostic
ultrasound. I ran a little ultrasound unit, and I had a technician and
half a secretary and an auxiliary nurse.

### Years after College

**Abbate:**

So this was . . . When did you get the degree?

**Shipp:**

My degree was ‘71 to ‘74, and then ‘74 to ‘77, I worked in diagnostics
ultrasound.

**Abbate:**

So that had nothing to do with computing.

**Shipp:**

That’s right; yes.

**Abbate:**

And that was a kind of merger of your technical and . . .

“Shipp:”

. . . and sort of people, physical stuff: yes.

**Abbate:**

Why did you end up leaving that job?

**Shipp:**

I went off to . . . I joined a contemplative farming community.
\[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

Wow\!

**Shipp:**

In Wales. I stayed there for six years, so that was until ‘83\. We had
cows and hens and bees, and we grew all our vegetables, and we had quite
a lot of guests. It was very odd thing to do, and I guess it was just
something I needed to do, and it was a kind of a meeting point of a
number of interests. It was the very early days of interest in
sustainability and self-sufficiency, and communal living, but also a
sort of contemplative sort of approach.

So there was no computing there\! \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

I can imagine.

**Shipp:**

When I left there, we’d moved into a period of really high unemployment
over that six years, and people said, “You’ll find it really, really
difficult to get a job. You won’t be able to get a job. It will be
dreadful.” And so I came out feeling that it was a difficult situation,
and that I’d have to try really hard to get a job, and I’d be lucky if I
got one—which in retrospect was a kind of silly attitude, but it seemed
to me that six years away from physics was like a lifetime, and that I
wouldn’t get back into it. I also didn’t want to go back and do
something I’d already done. I’d developed my interest in psychoanalysis,
I suppose, and interpersonal stuff, through living in the community, and
I’d read a lot of Jung and that sort of thing, and I applied for every
job that I thought I might get, and the first job I was offered was in
psychiatric rehabilitation. There’s an organization here called “Mind”;
it’s a big mental health charity.

**Abbate:**

Is that an acronym for something?

**Shipp:**

No, it’s not. Westminster Association for Mental Health was a kind of
branch of it; so it was a voluntary organization funded by the local
council. It was a small, quite unique psychiatric rehabilitation place,
where we did printing, and the people who were being rehabilitated
designed what we printed, so there was a really strong sort of art and
design angle to it.

**Abbate:**

When you say printing . . .

**Shipp:**

We did hot foil embossing, which is a kind of hand-printing method.

**Abbate:**

So these were images, not text?

**Shipp:**

That’s right, yes; greetings cards, mostly. We sold them. I did the
marketing for a little bit. It was very small; there were just three of
us running it. We sold them in really posh and trendy places, because
they were such unusual cards, and they were beautifully printed\! There
were about 20 mentally ill people at a time, and they stayed about a
year, and we counseled them and helped them to move on to employment or
education or something.

I went into analysis. Because we were counseling these clients, we were
expected to be in analysis or therapy ourselves, so we could not get our
stuff tangled up with their stuff; and that was quite important, because
it wasn’t like a hospital or a social worker situation, where you had
clear-cut boundaries; we didn’t even have an office that was for staff.
We just worked together with the—we called them “workers”—all day every
day, and so you were very exposed to their state, and it was quite
draining, because you had to be what they needed you to be.

After I’d been there two or three years, we decided to set up a computer
project there, because there wasn’t much employment. Employment was
still really difficult, and we thought if we could give the people basic
office computing skills, it would help them get employment; so I took
that project on. At that time, the Greater London Council had a sort of
arrangement with IBM that meant that voluntary organizations could get
IBM desktop computers—get grants for them.

**Abbate:**

And this would have been 1985 or something like that?

**Shipp:**

Yes, That’s right.

### Beginning a Career in Computers

**Abbate:**

So it had been maybe ten years since you’d been working with computers,
and in the meantime PCs had appeared.

**Shipp:**

Yes. It was more than ten, because it was 1970 when I worked before, so
it was fifteen years’ gap.

The Greater London Council put on a day or two’s training for voluntary
organizations—people who wanted to get into desktop computing—and made
it very easy to get computers and software. So I just sort of picked it
up and started doing one-to-one teaching with our workers. It was
spreadsheets, word processors, database; and it was amazing; it was so
different from fifteen years before, and it was really quite fun\! And I
decided I needed some more training to be able to run this project, and
so I investigated what was on offer, and the local polytechnic had a
postgraduate diploma—two-year, part-time—in computing, and so I did
that.

**Abbate:**

That was the North London Polytechnic?

**Shipp:**

Yes. And that was really good; it was very practical. I could have gone
and done an M.Sc. at a university, but after Oxford, I had the view
that—I mean, at Oxford I did a special option in electronics, and it
was my best paper in the finals—and I didn’t know anything useful about
electronics\! \[laughs.\] There was just nothing that I could have
applied of it to ordinary life, or even to a sort of job that involved
some electronics. So I had the view that universities didn’t teach you
anything useful, and that polytechnics did; so I deliberately chose to
do this course at polytechnic. But since then, all the polytechnics have
been renamed as universities, which was sort of clever—but to me, that
was a loss of a useful distinction.

**Abbate:**

Did you think that was sort of on purpose, in the sense that Oxford
thought they were above practical things?

**Shipp:**

I think Oxford thought that they were training academics, so they were
training people who would go on and do what the teachers did, which was
sort of forefront research—which is fine, really. It was, I guess, a
development of thinking, and a frame, but . . .

**Abbate:**

But the polytechnic served you well?

**Shipp:**

Yes, yes. It was really useful, and we had lots of assignments, and lots
of hands-on work, and I would spend most of my evenings there, working
on their computers. I really enjoyed using my brain in that sort of way,
which I hadn’t done for at least ten years.

So that was a two-year course, and I was still working in the
psychiatric rehabilitation center, and I was really beginning to get
burned out with this very intense contact with \[the patients\], that
sort of put demands on your personality. So I guess I was watching the
job adverts, and there was an advert for an educational software
developer here at the Open University. I hadn’t finished the
postgraduate diploma, but I was quite near the end, and it was clear
that I could program quite easily, and so I applied for that. They
didn’t give me the post. They offered me a post in a new little group
that was a sub-group of the software development group: software quality
assurance; and I took that, not because I wanted to work in quality
assurance, but as a sort of way into educational software. In fact, it
wasn’t what most people would think of as QA; it was actually
troubleshooting the start of the home computing enterprise. I came here
\[to the Open University\] in ‘87, and a few months later, we were
starting the first course where every student had to have their own
computer at home. They had a sort of special offer: they had Amstrad
1512’s, I think they were called . . .

**Abbate:**

Is that a British computer? Amstrad?

**Shipp:**

Yes. Yes, it was tremendously successful. It was the first
low-cost—perhaps it was an IBM clone—but it was the first low-cost
desktop computer. You could get it either with one floppy drive or
two—no hard disks—and there was some sort of policy as to what
hardware \[the students\] should have; they didn’t have to have a color
monitor. So it was really troubleshooting the start of that. I did that
for two or three years, and then moved into software development, and
did that for another ten years.

### Software Developer

**Abbate:**

Now you had said, earlier—I guess I’d asked if you’d experienced
discrimination as a woman, and you had said that you thought that
perhaps, for that first job, they would have hired you for software
development rather than quality assurance. Is that because all the
people who ended up in QA were women and all the developers were men, or
what gave you that sense?

**Shipp:**

Well, it was really interesting. All the software developers were men,
and the person who got the job hadn’t—they wanted someone to program in
C, and I’d actually been using C in my postgraduate diploma, and the guy
they appointed hadn’t any experience with C—or with programming, I
think. Or he’d done a bit; he was a physicist, and he’d just done his
doctorate, I think. He was very bright, but he himself always said,
thereafter, that he was a bad programmer\! But he presented a very
confident exterior, and I did feel that they . . . What I felt was that
they didn’t know how to read women; they knew how to read men, and he
was absolutely fine—but they didn’t know that I would also have been
fine. I had to sort of come in through a back door, and I actually had
to ask to be allowed to do some programming, and do a complete project
to prove that I could do it, before I could apply again. So I had to
apply again, for a new post; I had to prove that I could do it before
they would believe that I could. And somebody in the department did say
that they used to say in the corridors, “Oh, we won’t have any women
here,” and they perceived women as sort of troublesome.

**Abbate:**

This is in the Computing Center?

**Shipp:**

Yes. And \[they said\] that, you know, they were all men, and they knew
how to get on and manage things in a sort of efficient way, and they
didn’t want women with their—well, values, I suppose, and emotion and
relationships.

**Abbate:**

God forbid\! \[both laugh.\]

But they didn’t have pinups or anything?

**Shipp:**

No, no\! They were very nice. It was just a sort of strange male
enclave—which was very interesting, because back in 1970 in the MRC
Computer Unit—where, again, they were very nice people, and they must
have been very bright—there were men and women, and there wasn’t, as far
as I could see, a sense that it was a male thing. In fact, more of the
programmers that I came across were women.

**Abbate:**

On the mainframe.

**Shipp:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

So were any of the other women in QA promoted? Or was there just not any
sort of upward mobility?

**Shipp:**

Well, in the QA there was only a manager—who had been a software
developer, so he’d moved over to being called a manager—and there was
me.

**Abbate:**

Oh, there wasn’t anyone else?

**Shipp:**

That’s right. Later they did. After I’d moved into software development,
they got one or two more women—all the other people in QA now are women,
and they have sort of clerical/technical posts. And they do have a few
women—they did gradually, after me, get more women software developers.

### Deveoping Educational Software for Open University

**Abbate:**

You spent about ten years, eleven years, developing software. What were
some of your main projects?

**Shipp:**

Well, it was all educational software. The very first thing I did was a
teaching package, a sort of tutorial package, on the phases of
heat-treating steels. It was about the different phases of alloys and
steels. So that was for the materials science course; I worked on
several packages for that course. And then the main course I worked on
over that time was the Technology Foundation course, which had a whole
extensive set of numeracy teaching packages. Because it’s the Open
University, we don’t have any qualifications people have to have in
order to come, so there’s a massive range of ability, and in a lot of
technology and science courses, maths is the problem. I tended to tutor
the courses that I worked on as a Software Developer. Tutoring is a sort
of part-time job; people all over the country are our tutors, and they
normally have another job as well.

**Abbate:**

And that’s working one-on-one with the students?

**Shipp:**

Yes. So you’ll have a group of about fifteen or twenty students, and you
do tutorials with them, and you mark their \[exams\].

**Abbate:**

Oh, so you see them as a group?

**Shipp:**

Yes. Yes, you get to know them really well. Open University students get
much more individual attention than ordinary university students. It’s
really interesting. I feel that my students had a sort of
better—“better” is not the right word—well, they had much better
quality tuition than I had at Oxford, because what the \[OU\] tutors are
interested in is teaching, as opposed to research. Normally, OU tutors
are quite passionate about teaching, and they’re teaching these adults,
who are really interesting people and want to learn.

So normally I tutored courses that I was writing software for, so that
I’d have a sense of who I was writing it for; and that was really
motivating, and it made a really big difference to the software I
developed.

**Abbate:**

Did you get feedback on how well it was working?

**Shipp:**

Yes. Whenever I produced a new package, I’d go along to summer school.
They have one week—in those days, most courses had a one-week summer
school that all students would go to. So I used to go along and watch
students using the software, and take notes and talk to them about it
and get a lot of feedback. Then later, when there wasn’t that
opportunity, I’d get a group of students in and watch them—when a
package was near completion.

So I worked on a lot of numeracy packages. There were some other
packages for that Technology Foundation course. One was to do with
information.

**Abbate:**

Who decided the content of the packages?

**Shipp:**

There’d be a Course Team, made up of academics from the faculty, and
editors, and graphic designers, and the software developer.

**Abbate:**

So were you part of that?

**Shipp:**

Yes—well, it depended from team to team. Some teams would see you as
fully a part of the team, and others would see you as more working for
them. So they would decide on the curriculum and what needed to be
taught, and then there’d be huge variation in how good an idea they had
of how they wanted to teach it by computer. Some would—particularly on
the Technology Foundation course, because I knew the course and taught
it—I would think about how we were going to teach this material by
computer, and so I would design what it did. But another course I worked
on was a third-level economics course, microeconomics, and there, it was
somewhere between the two. The academics knew what they wanted to teach,
had a really clear of the content, but they didn’t have any experience
of using the computer to teach; and I didn’t have any knowledge of
economics; so there was this gap. And so I developed a sort of method
for dealing with it, which was that we set up video: we videoed
ourselves discussing how to teach it, but then, in the process, them
teaching me the subject—so we sort of explored how you might teach it,
and the difficulties in understanding the subject. The video was trained
on the paper that we worked on, and I wanted to record what things I
needed to point to, and what things they needed to draw or point to, and
I thought it would give us ideas as to what the student would need to
point to, or mark, or cross on the screen. And that was absolutely
wonderful; it was really effective.

**Abbate:**

So you came up with a methodology for producing course materials, in
addition to actually doing it.

**Shipp:**

Yes, for sort of arriving at a design. Another thing that was
interesting about that was that we spent probably half a day on each
package—just me and one academic. I’d have read up the subject a bit
beforehand, so we’d both come along with some ideas, and then we’d
explore them. And because there were five or six topics, sometimes there
was a long gap before I could implement the program; and having this
video was wonderful, because when I looked at it again, it was as if my
unconscious had carried on processing the ideas, and I could see really
quickly what we could use and what we couldn’t use, and how to order it
and put it together into a good story. With the first of those packages,
I think I used Powerpoint to put together a design of the whole teaching
package and how it would go, and showed it to the Course Team, and we
discussed it, and then I implemented it—and after that, they just sort
of left me to get on with it\! \[laughs.\] So that was a really good set
of packages.

**Abbate:**

Were you experimenting with different forms, in terms of, “Should this
be linear or should it be nonlinear?” Were there sort of basic questions
about how to implement things on a computer that you were exploring?

**Shipp:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

I don’t know how long the university had been doing this before you
came.

**Shipp:**

They’d been doing it since about 1971, so it was a long history.

**Abbate:**

On the computer?

**Shipp:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

So they expected the students to have computers in ‘71?

**Shipp:**

Yes. Initially they had mainframe —you know, they’d write educational
software, put it on the mainframe, and students would go to study
centers, where they could use interactive—it would be teletype sort of
things, wouldn’t it? It was a very, very innovative department, really;
absolutely at the forefront of educational software. So there was a sort
of tradition in the department of doing tutorial software, and also
simulation software, for the science—physics, maths . . . They did other
things, database-y sort of things, as well.

But I guess there were several things going on. There was the
development of my thinking about how you teach by computer, and there
was also the development of how you implement it; and my interest was in
how you teach by computer. I became quite passionate about experiential
learning, and that was really in discussion more with academics who were
my friends, and colleagues, and at conferences that I went to; and also,
we have this Institute of Educational Technology, which is the sort of
research bit associated with educational computing, and I was a member
of that research group. They didn’t produce software, but they wrote a
lot of papers. My thinking was always, not “How can we tell the students
about this subject? How can we use the computer to tell them?” But “How
can we give them an experience that they can learn for themselves from?
What can we actually provide that they can explore and interact with,
that will engage them and change their understanding?” I’m always
interested in developing understanding, as opposed to rote learning.

Over the time that I was working in that field, what you could do and
provide developed a fair bit, with the introduction of windows and
object-oriented programming. You could do much more graphically, as time
went on. So there was that development of the ideas about teaching by
computing; and then the technical implementation side of it was driven
by the department, really, and so we moved from—initially it was C, and
then we moved to C with a funny precursor of Windows called GEM
\[produced by Digital Research Inc.\], and then we moved to C with
windows, and then to C++, and then to more integrated . . . I can’t
think of how to put it; there’s a sort of further development of—the
early work with C++ was object-oriented, but not to the extent—there was
another leap—I can’t think how to describe it.

**Abbate:**

Do you use Java now?

**Shipp:**

I don’t. I think some people are using Java, but I didn’t. I had to use
Delphi for one project, which was interesting, because Delphi’s a
PASCAL-based language, or system; and I hadn’t used that since my
postgraduate diploma, so I thought of that as sort of a beginners’
language\! \[laughs.\] But the actual change to the object-oriented
methodology I found quite interesting and stimulating, and I had a
couple of academic friends who were very into that. That sort of
methodology of how you construct something so that you can deal with
this complex thing that you’ve got to build: I found that quite
stimulating and interesting, but I didn’t at all enjoy the move from
language to language, and I found it quite tiresome, and time-wasting.
It was like, you know, you’d just got used to using this little tool and
being really skilled at it, and you’d have to throw it away and get
another one, and it would slow you down; and I wanted to build things.
I’m not a languages person, and I felt as if my hard disk was getting
full\! \[laughs.\] I thought my brain just didn’t have room for any more
of these strings of hieroglyphics that one had to keep on relearning.
And I’d had a very, very demanding project on a third-level
telecommunications course, which had got into difficulties and I had to
take over and work immensely hard. The whole of that—it’s probably me;
partly me and partly the job—it was characterized by periods of intense
overwork, of working weekends and evenings and being at work until 11
p.m., to the exclusion of any social life for those periods. The last
cycle of that, on this telecommunications course: I felt quite burnt out
at the end of it, and I felt the management above me had managed things
very badly. Also, there were changes happening in that area of the
university that meant that it looked to me as if our job role was moving
more towards production: they were trying to streamline things, and . .
.

**Abbate:**

You were going to be a software factory?

**Shipp:**

Yes\! Yes, that’s right. In my view, it was based on a false assumption,
which was that there was someone else who could provide the educational
design—because in my experience, there generally wasn’t. Because the
academics usually didn’t have experience in how you can use a computer
to teach, and in my view, there was a lot to it: you know, it took had
taken me a lot of years to develop a skill for teaching in that way. I
experienced my job as sort of bridging that gap between the academics’
knowledge and the. . . . Most of my colleagues didn’t do as much
educational design work as I did, and there was this gap that nobody
much was bridging or knew how to bridge. I thought that was going to
become much more problematic as we moved to more of a sort of factory
mentality.

So that was when I moved to the academic side of the fence. My theory
now is that because the development side is getting much more into a
production mentality, that the academics themselves have to develop
their—it has to become normal that they think of teaching by computer
and that they develop an expertise in how you do it well.

### Current Projects

**Abbate:**

So the work has sort of shifted from the computing people to the
academics?

**Shipp:**

Yes. So I’m doing fairly similar work, except I’m just not doing the
programming. But because we’re moving more to the Web, it’s more
feasible for a programmer to make a content system that we can put
teaching material into. I’ve become very keen on Flash, which is a Web
technology.

**Abbate:**

It’s graphics, or video?

**Shipp:**

Yes. Well, most Web sites use it just for graphical things, but it’s
actually superb for the sort of teaching that we do in this academic
field—which is systems, which is all about diagrams, and using diagrams
to explore things. So it’s a really good tool for doing diagrammatic
teaching, with speech and . . .

**Abbate:**

I’m not sure what you mean by “with speech”.

**Shipp:**

Well, little tutorials where there’s some speech: you know, you have a
picture and some speech, and then you move on and there’s some more
speech.

**Abbate:**

So there’s audio while you’re looking at it?

**Shipp:**

There’s audio, yes.

### Working as a Systems Researcher and Teacher

**Abbate:**

Now, tell me: Your area is now Information Systems. Can you tell me a
little more about what the content of that is?

**Shipp:**

Okay, well: I don’t actually know what information systems is\!
\[laughs.\] But this department is called “Systems.”

**Abbate:**

Oh, it’s just called “Systems.”

**Shipp:**

The department is. I guess I think of myself as an academic in Systems;
but it has three application areas. I’ll come back to what “systems” is.

**Abbate:**

So is that your official title?

**Shipp:**

No, my official title is “Lecturer in Information Systems.” But
“systems” is about—well, it’s about working with complexity, so it’s
about enabling people to handle complex situations. The approach is
different from most scientific approaches, which are all about honing in
on finer and finer details in trying to understand something; systems is
about stepping back and finding ways of seeing the whole picture, and
when you study something, not losing the sense of the connections and
influences that are in the wider picture. So it’s very relevant to
ecology, and it’s relevant to management and organizations, and it’s
relevant to information; so it has these three application areas. It is
also used a lot in family therapy, and so there’s a sort of
interpersonal aspect to it as well.

Because I’m coming from a background in computing, my way in is with the
focus on information systems. But I tell them that I think they’ve got
the wrong word\! \[laughs.\] Because to me, “information systems” means
something slightly different. To me, it’s a branch of computer science,
and here, I don’t see it as that; I see it as much more at the
people-organizational end.

**Abbate:**

So the courses you teach are actually called “Information Systems”? Or
they’re categorized in that way from the students’ perspective?

**Shipp:**

Well, the course that I’ve been involved in in the year that I’ve been
in this role is a systems course. I can’t remember what it’s called\!
\[laughs.\] It’s about systems thinking. It’s a second-level course
about systems thinking, and there’s a third-level course about systems
practice. The course covers environment and sustainability; it covers
systems and yourself and your relationships; management in
organizations; globalization and information. But I actually wrote two
blocks of it: the one on “Systems, You and Your Relationships” and the
final block, where students do a project of their own and they apply all
the systems thinking to it. And I did that because there were gaps;
people were needed to do that.

**Abbate:**

Okay, so you were talking about the systems course.

**Shipp:**

So I think, in a way, I’m redefining at the moment what I am, and I’ve
got this name, which is Lecturer in Information Systems, and I’ve got
this thing, which is Systems, that is an approach that I want to use;
but I haven’t quite put the two together. And my role in this course,
which has just completed its first year, has really been getting it to
work on the Web—getting the Web bit of the teaching to happen, because
it had been decided that we would do a lot of the teaching on the Web,
and it wasn’t really happening. Bits hadn’t come together, and partly
because of my background, I guess, I could see what needed to be done,
and how it would work, and how to put people together in such a way that
they could actually function and produce this stuff.

**Abbate:**

So it’s still evolving?

**Shipp:**

Yes. And I’m about to—I’m going to do a doctorate\! \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

Oh, really?

**Shipp:**

Yes\! At the moment, I’m on what we call “study leave”—which we have two
months a year, because we don’t have vacations like ordinary
universities—to decide exactly what I’m going to do the doctorate on.
Because I feel I need to have a clear research area —I feel I need to
know about something in order to have something to teach, really.

**Abbate:**

You seem to reinvent yourself every decade or so.

**Shipp:**

Yes. Well, I guess it’s more—I don’t know. It’s finding different ways
of putting the bits together that sort of work, and I feel I’m very
lucky that I’ve been able to put them together in different ways in
different situations, and have these different experiences, and I do
feel that they feed into each other. For example, a lot of what I use in
my current role I learnt when I was working in mental health, through
working so closely one-to-one with people, trying to teach people who
find it quite difficult to communicate and understand, and to teach them
to use software. You had to really get inside their heads. And even—this
is quite extreme, but even contemplation and prayer is actually about
getting inside someone else’s head; to me, it’s about feeling something,
experiencing something from someone else’s perspective. And that’s very
similar to some of the systems approaches, which are about understanding
a complex situation by seeing it from different perspectives. So part of
the teaching in the block on “Systems, You, and Your Relationships” is
teaching students how to learn to see things from other people’s
perspectives, and giving them little exercises to explore that. And when
I worked in mental health, we used role-play a lot in understanding our
clients, and to help us do our counseling work with them. And again,
role-play is something that people use in systems, and management in
organizations.

**Abbate:**

Do you think the systems approach to information is more appealing to
female students than if it were presented as a branch of computer
science?

**Shipp:**

Maybe . . . I just don’t have a clear sense of what they mean here by
“information systems,” because when I did my post-graduate diploma
(that was before object-oriented programming and—what did they call
it?—”top-down design”), there were those systems—SADM \[Systems
Analysis and Design Methods\]—and so there was systems analysis. It was
a job, actually, wasn’t it? You had Systems Analysts.

**Abbate:**

It was much more of a sort of engineering / math / computer thing—not as
holistic as what you seem to be describing.

**Shipp:**

Yes. I mean, I think of information systems—to me, it means whatever
that has become. It means sort of analyzing a system, rather than, as
you say, something more holistic.

**Abbate:**

Well, do you get a lot of women enrolled for it? Maybe you’ve only
taught it this once, but do you have a sense of gender ratios from the
enrollment?

**Shipp:**

Well, we haven’t got—we’ve got systems courses; we actually don’t have
an “information systems” course. We have courses that are produced that
sort of involve it. The Senior Lecturer in Information Systems, John
Naughton, set up this massively successful course, “You, Your Computer,
and the Net,” which is about the history of the Internet, and also
develops students’ ability to use it and to write simple Web pages. So
it’s sort of there in other courses that we’ve been involved in, and
there is a plan now to have a Master’s in Information Systems. But I’m
not really interested in it as a subject in itself; I’m interested in
using systems to explore problems, and some of those will be problems to
do with information.

**Abbate:**

More concrete problems?

**Shipp:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

I’m thinking back: You had mentioned, a little while ago, something
about going to conferences, and I wondered if you were active in
professional societies, and if so, which ones you had found most
congenial.

**Shipp:**

I’m some kind of member of the British Computer Society, which I don’t
find of any interest at all\! \[laughs.\] The conferences I used to go
to were to do with computer-assisted learning, and there were two groups
in the U.K. that have conferences: one has one a year and the other has
one every other year. Oh, and I went to one conference in the States, on
experiential learning, and that was the most interesting. So I haven’t
really found particular professional bodies that I’ve been involved
with. But there’s a sort of research community around educational
software that I’m loosely part of.

### General Experience with Computers

**Abbate:**

I have some more general questions. You’ve had some pretty varied
experiences with computers. What have you found to be the most
satisfying part of working with them?

**Shipp:**

The most satisfying, I think, is when something is nearly complete, and
you’ve had this enormous slog . . . I think that the beginning and the
end of a project are both . . . There’s the bit at the end where it’s
nearly complete, and you’ve got this thing you’ve created, and it’s
on-screen, and you’re just doing the last polishing how effective it is:
that’s very satisfying. But there’s an early stage, where you’re
constructing this thing out of nothing: first of all, you have to
imagine it out of nothing, and that was partly where I found the
object-oriented methodology really interesting and helpful. One of the
early object-oriented people said that you should personify your
objects; you should talk about them as if they’re people\! So when I was
trying to learn to work in an object-oriented way, I sort of consciously
made myself work in that way. At the beginning of each object I’d say,
“I am the exercise guru; I know about blah blah blah,” and I’d sort of
personify them. \[laughs.\] And it seemed absurd, but I just did it,
because I wanted to see if this would help; and what I found was that—I
guess it’s like the cast of a play. You invent these objects and you
decide what role they’re going to have, and then it’s as if you get to
know them, as you begin to work on the project; it’s as if they’re
people that you get to know. So to start with, you’ve invented them; but
as you go along, new tasks need to be done, and you know who to give it
to\! \[laughs.\] So there’s this sense of getting to know them—and I’m
sure that’s how it is with the author of a book or play, this sense of
getting to know the characters and knowing how they would behave. So
there’s something about that. It’s almost like creating a team that
works well together, and all the roles are clear, and everyone knows
what everyone else is doing and who to give this task to.

But the middle bit in between, of actually getting out this code: it’s
all right, but there were a lot of tedious bits to it. The actual logic
and algorithms of it I enjoyed, but it’s all the glitches and little
tweaks that you have to know because this system or this language
doesn’t cope with this, and so you have to put in that line of code
there—all that I found a bit tedious and trying.

**Abbate:**

I’m wondering: I guess you started in computing in ‘69 or something . .
.

**Shipp:**

‘70, Yes.

**Abbate:**

1970; and now it’s 2001; How do you think the field has changed over
that time?

**Shipp:**

Wow\! That’s a big question\! \[laughs.\] How do I think . . . ? Can you
say what in particular has changed?

**Abbate:**

Either the technology or the culture, how people work with them.
Whatever seems most—I mean, obviously there have been huge changes; you
don’t have to be comprehensive; but I’m just curious what stands out to
you as the most significant.

**Shipp:**

Well, I thought one . . . Sort of standing back, there was one thing I
noticed: that it seems to me there’s a sort of tussle between a movement
to make computing accessible and easy and usable, and a movement to keep
it obscure and for the experts. I felt that was happening in the
languages: that FORTRAN was like doing algebra, and that was fine if
you’re a mathematical person; and then PASCAL—and that movement around
it—seemed to be really strong on making code that’s very easy to
maintain, and that one person can pick up something another person’s
written, because it’s all transparent; what you’re doing is transparent,
and you can even make it read like English. And when PASCAL became the
major—I don’t know if it ever became the major language, because COBOL
was still existing, but it seemed that was a sort of peak of trying to
open it out, so that it was something ordinary people could see into.
And then C —and C++, and probably Java, too—seemed to be a sort of
moving back again, grabbing back that territory and saying “No, no, no\!
We don’t want anyone to be able to read what we’ve done, because then
they’ll think they can do it too; and we must show them that we are
mentally clever by writing things that they can’t understand\!” So that
desire to make it look obscure and difficult and technical seemed to
pull it back. And then . . .

\[Break in the Recording\]

**Abbate:**

Okay, we’re back.

**Shipp:**

Yes. I don’t know if I’ve got enough distance on what’s happening now to
see whether that fits in that pattern, but I think it’s happening over
the Web. To me, Flash was a really interesting technology, and also some
of the Web development tools: again, they seemed to open things out, to
make it easier for ordinary people to be involved and participate. Flash
is really interesting, because compared with what I call the more
“professional” tools for developing imagery for the Web, it’s very
limited: it just has a limited set of things that you can do, and that
makes it quick and easy to learn, and everything about its design is to
make it easy to use. It almost seems to be coming from a different
philosophy from other technologies, which are about allowing you to do
every possible thing you might ever want to do with it, but you’ve got
to go on a two-week course to learn how to do it, and that’ll be very
expensive. So it’s a democratization sort of thing. So I’m quite excited
about Flash, and I’ve used it a lot, and I’ve been running courses for
other people in the university, to encourage them to learn to use it and
to use it in their teaching. So maybe there’s another wave of allowing
people in—and probably there’ll be a backlash\! \[laughs.\]

### General Thoughts on Gender and Technology

**Abbate:**

Do you think as far as women are concerned, that computing has become
more or less open over time?

**Shipp:**

Well, as I said—and this is really well documented, isn’t it?—in the
early days, the women were programmers and the men were hardware people,
because the hardware bits were seen as the high prestige bit. And then
as that changed, women didn’t move into looking after the hardware so
much, but men took over the software side of things. I feel that where
I’m working is abnormal, in that there was this bunch of men who set
up the software department, and they’re still all there.

**Abbate:**

That’s here?

**Shipp:**

Here at the OU, the Educational Software Group. They’re still all here,
and the people who are managers came from that group; and so here it’s
still quite a male emphasis in the software area. And certainly in the
computing department of the Maths computing faculty as well. But I
suspect it’s different out in the commercial world.

**Abbate:**

That it’s more even?

**Shipp:**

I suspect it is; but I don’t know, to be honest.

**Abbate:**

Did you ever feel that as a woman, you didn’t have equal access to
training or promotions or other kinds of job perks?

**Shipp:**

“I’m not sure” is the answer. I think that in my department, the male
gifts tended to be looked up to more, so that success in doing a
complete package that actually worked and taught really well was of less
interest than doing something really difficult, technically, that was to
do with programming. But somehow I’ve been quite good at being visible
enough. I feel my career’s been all right because I’ve looked after it.
Someone less aware, politically, of what’s going on, I think might have
had more difficulty as a woman in that group.

**Abbate:**

Did you have any mentors or role models who have encouraged you in
computing?

**Shipp:**

Let me think. Well, the chap who was my software manager, I guess, in
the early projects I did in that department; a chap called Phil Butcher.
He was very encouraging, and I learnt quite a lot from him in terms of
quality of teaching that you can deliver by computer. I learned quite a
lot from Diana Laurillard, who’s one of our Pro-Vice-Chancellors now.

**Abbate:**

What was her last name?

**Shipp:**

Diana Laurillard. She’s very well known as a researcher in educational
computing. And she worked on a couple of the early projects that I
worked on, and I argued with her fiercely quite a lot—and because of
that, I learned a lot from her\! \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

I saw a poster at the entrance about a woman Vice Chancellor. Is that
her?

**Shipp:**

She’s a Pro-Vice-Chancellor here. No, we’re having a new Vice Chancellor
from South Africa who’s a woman; maybe that was it.

**Abbate:**

That’s probably it.

**Shipp:**

Yes. So, I learned a lot from her. She probably doesn’t realize that,
but it was from working from her; and that was to do with providing
experiences, and interactive experiences.

Another mentor probably was a friend, Benedict Heal, who’s an
object-oriented expert. He was an academic in the Maths and Computing
faculty; he works free-lance now. We spent long, long times talking
about objects and design and things, and he was very encouraging.

And just friends, and course teams around the university that I’ve
discussed teaching with. I’ve got a friend, Tony Nixon, who . . . In
fact, two of my greatest friends: When I was in my more early days of
software development—particularly when I was working these horrendous
hours—I had two very, very close electronic friendships. One of them was
this Tony Nixon, who lived in York at the time, and we both were
teaching the Technology Foundation course, and we were quite passionate
about what you could do with students, what fun things you could do that
worked in terms of teaching. He’s now a Lecturer here as well. He was a
quite a key person. And I have another very close electronic friend: he
was an object-oriented guru at Essex University, and he works for IBM
now; and he was passionate about experiential learning and peer-centered
learning, and experiential learning in a lecture context. So those were
both relationships where somehow—well, because it was writing what we
thought—they were very creative, and a great deal of thinking and
development of ideas went on.

**Abbate:**

So you hadn’t met them in person?

**Shipp:**

Yes. \[Tony I worked with\]. We were both working at summer school for a
week, and so I worked with him for a week; and then I saw him
occasionally, and made friends with his family.

**Abbate:** So that kept up the interaction?

**Shipp:**

Yes. But it was a daily—both of those were sort of daily email
friendships.

And the other one, Bruce Anderson: I think he’d given a seminar here,
which I’d missed, so that the initial contact was email; and then we met
up, but that relationship was almost entirely by email.

And then that . . . I don’t know why, but somehow things change, don’t
they; and I don’t have any intense email friendships now.

**Abbate:**

Well, it sounds like you have quite a network here, anyway.

**Shipp:**

Yes.

### Final Thoughts

**Abbate:**

Have you found it difficult to balance your work and family or personal
responsibilities?

**Shipp:**

Yes; yes. I tend to have had these cycles of maybe three to six months
of really intense overwork, and then six months of normal work; and
that’s quite a strain on whoever is my partner at the time. I don’t
know whether that has—it may have limited what sort of relationships
I’ve been able to have. My current partner, who I’ve been with about
five years: he worked in the same software development group as me, and
he’s a free-lance Web developer now, and he’s just really tolerant of
that.

**Abbate:**

Because he knows what it’s like.

**Shipp:**

Yes; yes.

**Abbate:**

Is that sort of inherent in that job, then, that . . .

**Shipp:**

I think so. I think it’s partly me—but I wasn’t like that in previous
jobs, so I do have three previous careers \[laughs\] where I wasn’t like
that\! So I think it is something to do with \[the culture of software
development\].

**Abbate:**

Do you think that’s a deterrent to women to do that kind of work?

**Shipp:**

Yes, I do. I think I wouldn’t have—if I had had children, I wouldn’t
have wanted to carry on working in that way.

**Abbate:**

Do you have any advice for young women considering going into computing?

**Shipp:**

Oh\! I suppose it’s to keep sight of your own values, so that those can
be part of the whole picture. Those insights and interests that a person
has, which may not seem to be at the core of what their colleagues are
interested in: to keep ahold of them, and to have confidence that they
are important and have value, and perhaps to try and find other people
\[with whom\] they can develop these bits of themselves. It can be such
a narrowing field of work. I used to have the feeling, when I was in an
intense programming stage, it was like going down a mental tunnel—that
the concentration you had to sustain, and the stuff you had to keep in
your head, meant you had to block everything else out, for weeks on end;
and that can be really disabling. So it’s important to keep a breadth of
interest.

**Abbate:**

All right. Thank you very much for doing the interview\!

**Shipp:**

Okay\!

Retrieved from
"<http://ethw.org/index.php?title=Oral-History:Karen_Shipp&oldid=113057>"

[Categories](/Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* [Profession](/Category:Profession "Category:Profession")
* [Engineering
  education](/Category:Engineering_education "Category:Engineering education")
* [Computer science
  education](/Category:Computer_science_education "Category:Computer science education")
* [Computation
  theory](/Category:Computation_theory "Category:Computation theory")
* [Knowledge based
  systems](/Category:Knowledge_based_systems "Category:Knowledge based systems")
* [Computer
  classes](/Category:Computer_classes "Category:Computer classes")

## Contents

* [1 About Karen Shipp](#About_Karen_Shipp)
* [2 About the Interview](#About_the_Interview)
* [3 Copyright Statement](#Copyright_Statement)
* [4 Interview](#Interview)
  * [4\.1 Family and Early Years](#Family_and_Early_Years)
  * [4\.2 Attending Oxford](#Attending_Oxford)
  * [4\.3 First experiences with
    Computers](#First_experiences_with_Computers)
  * [4\.4 Computers and Education at
    Oxford](#Computers_and_Education_at_Oxford)
  * [4\.5 Years after College](#Years_after_College)
  * [4\.6 Beginning a Career in
    Computers](#Beginning_a_Career_in_Computers)
  * [4\.7 Software Developer](#Software_Developer)
  * [4\.8 Deveoping Educational Software for Open
    University](#Deveoping_Educational_Software_for_Open_University)
  * [4\.9 Current Projects](#Current_Projects)
  * [4\.10 Working as a Systems Researcher and
    Teacher](#Working_as_a_Systems_Researcher_and_Teacher)
  * [4\.11 General Experience with
    Computers](#General_Experience_with_Computers)
  * [4\.12 General Thoughts on Gender and
    Technology](#General_Thoughts_on_Gender_and_Technology)
  * [4\.13 Final Thoughts](#Final_Thoughts)

[![Powered by
MediaWiki](/resources/assets/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)](//www.mediawiki.org/)
[![Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki](/extensions/SemanticMediaWiki/includes/../resources/images/smw_button.png)](https://www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 12 January 2015, at 13:08\.

* This page has been accessed 2,182 times.

* [About ETHW](/ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* [Policies and disclaimers](/ETHW:Policies "ETHW:Policies")

