Toggle navigation   

ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki(Main_Page)

* ** Go ****()
  * Browse by Subject(ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * Encyclopedia(Encyclopedia)
  
  * Oral Histories(Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * First Hand Histories(First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * LandmarksMilestones(/Landmarks)
  
  * Archives(Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * Education(ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * Random page(Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * Help(Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * Contact us(Special:Contact)
  
  * 
  * Recent changes(Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * New pages(Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* ** Actions ****()
  * View
    source(index.php?title=Oral-History:Judy_Clapp&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source e")
  
  * History(index.php?title=Oral-History:Judy_Clapp&action=history "Past revisions of this page [h]")
  
  * 
  * Oral-History(Oral-History:Judy_Clapp)
  
  * Discussion(index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Judy_Clapp&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page [t]")
  
  * 
* ** Tools ****()
  * What links
    here(Special:WhatLinksHere/Oral-History:Judy_Clapp "A list of all wiki pages that link here j]")
  
  * Related
    changes(Special:RecentChangesLinked/Oral-History:Judy_Clapp "Recent changes in pages linked from this page k]")
  
  * Special
    pages(Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages q]")
  
  * Printable
    version(index.php?title=Oral-History:Judy_Clapp&printable=yes "Printable version of this page p]")
  
  * Permanent
    link(index.php?title=Oral-History:Judy_Clapp&oldid=113039 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * Page
    information(index.php?title=Oral-History:Judy_Clapp&action=info)
  
  * Browse properties(Special:Browse/Oral-2DHistory:Judy_Clapp)
* ** Account ****(# "Account")
  * Log
    in(index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3AJudy+Clapp)
  
  * 
  * Request account(Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Judy Clapp

## About Judy Clapp

A pioneer of women in computer science, Judy Clapp was born in 1930 and
raised outside of New York City. She attended Smith College where she
majored in math and physics. She then went on to Harvard where she
received her M.S. After graduating, Clapp began working at MIT's Lincoln
Laboratories on the Whirlwind Computer, eventually joining MITRE where
she worked on the SAGE Project. Clapp was a pioneer for women in
computer programming, working on several projects that would change the
field of computer science and government defense systems.

In this interview, Clapp talks about her first experiences with
computers, the Whirlwind Computer, SAGE system, and other projects she
participated in during her time at MIT and MITRE. She also reflects on
her career, how she was received in the field as a woman computer
programmer, and her opinions on how the field of computer science has
progressed. Clapp also shares her thoughts on women in computer
programming.

## About the Interview

JUDY CLAPP: An Interview Conducted by Janet Abbate, IEEE History Center,
11 February 2001

Interview \# 583 for the IEEE History Center, The Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
Oral History Program, IEEE History Center at Stevens Institute of
Technology, Samuel C. Williams Library, 3rd Floor, Castle Point on
Hudson, Hoboken NJ 07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include
identification of the specific passages to be quoted, anticipated use of
the passages, and identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Judy Clapp, an oral history conducted in 2001 by Janet Abbate, IEEE
History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

## Interview

INTERVIEW: Judy Clapp\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: 11 February 2001\
LOCATION: Lexington, MA

### Background and Education

**Abbate:**

I usually start with family background. Can you tell me when you were
born and where you grew up?

**Clapp:**

You mean I really have to release my age? \laughs\ I was born in 1930,
and I grew up on Long Island, outside New York.

**Abbate:**

What did your parents do for a living?

**Clapp:**

My father was in advertising, and my mother was one of the early women
to graduate from college at CCNY, in accounting, and she was comptroller
of a hospital and nursing home. She worked almost all my youth, because
it was a time when there had been a depression. She did all kinds of
jobs, but she was always working.

**Abbate:**

Did you have brothers and sisters?

**Clapp:**

I have a brother, who is very different from me. He became a rabbi, so
he was the kind who was sort of philosophical, and I was the kind who
was factual and analytical, so I guess that’s . . . I was the older of
the two.

**Abbate:**

Did your parents encourage you to have a career?

**Clapp:**

Oh yes. They very much liked the idea, because my mother had always had
a career, and she worked at a time when none of her peers worked. I went
to Smith College, which is an all-women’s college, because that was a
place where women could excel without having the usual sorts of social
implications of competing with men, so I think that was another way in
which they encouraged me to go do my thing. I went to a public high
school. I graduated valedictorian—which was not something that endeared
you with your classmates\! \laughs.\ So yes, I guess you could say I
got parental encouragement to go off and study things. In college, even
though it was an all-women’s school, there were not very many women in
science. I majored in math and physics, and there were three of us in
physics in my class, out of maybe 400\. When I graduated, I got a
scholarship to come to Harvard, which in those days was Radcliffe for
women, and once again I studied applied science—computer science, the
closest they came to computer science. That was in 1951, and at that
time, I bet at most there were ever three women in my class, because all
my classes were over at Harvard; it was not something that Radcliffe
offered. They had a computation center, and Howard Aiken was the head of
it, and he had his Mark—I think at that point Mark I and Mark IV were
there; the others had gone off somewhere else. And we learned to do
programming both on desktop calculators and on the Mark—probably the
Mark I—which was a computer with gigantic paper tapes, punch paper
tapes; and you really knew the meaning of “loop,” because they hung off
a sprocket and they went round and round.

**Abbate:**

Was Grace Hopper still there?

**Clapp:**

No, she was there during the war days. This was now 1951 and ‘2, and she
had gone off to war and come back, and I don’t recall if there may have
been one other woman, but I’m not sure. Certainly my lab partners were
men. Let’s see. What else can I tell you about that time?

**Abbate:**

To go back a little bit: How early did you get interested in math and
science?

**Clapp:**

Math? In high school. I really liked it, I think because you—at least in
those days, you knew whether you were right or wrong at the end\!
\laughter\ And I hated history; I could see no value in it. And I
liked languages. So when I went to college, I avoided—I liked English,
but I avoided the history classes—forced to take one art and one music
class, which I’m glad they forced me to do—but mostly took math and
physics courses. No biology, no chemistry: just those two. Does that
answer your question?

**Abbate:**

Yes. Did you know you wanted to go on for graduate study? What did you
think you were going to do?

**Clapp:**

Well that was it: I couldn’t decide what I could do, and graduate school
was the easiest solution\! \laughter.\ And the opportunity to move to
Cambridge and go to Harvard was certainly appealing. Yes, it was like
extending school another year, and I did get my M.S. from Radcliffe. In
those days I had to take my exam by myself in a hall at Radcliffe; I
could not take my exam with the men over in Mem\orial\ Hall because I
was a Radcliffe student, not a Harvard student. And that was itself kind
of amusing: to sit there all by yourself with a proctor and take your
exam, while everybody else was in this big hall taking their exam.

**Abbate:**

I remember that hall.

**Clapp:**

I’m sure both of us have memories of that hall for other reasons, too.

**Abbate:**

Did you do any teaching while you were there?

**Clapp:**

No, I was a very much involved student. I was really only there one
year. At the end of the year, now I really did have to go look for a
job. I was not going to go on for my Ph.D.; I wanted to work. And I went
to professor Aiken and I said I was looking for a job, and he said, “I
could get you a job in Pennsylvania.” Nowadays of course I understand
that it was probably working on one of the early computers that they
were developing at the University of Pennsylvania. And I said, “I don’t
want to go to Pennsylvania.” And he just looked at me, and he had this
incredibly steely look, which people have talked about, and he said,
“When the job is more important to you than the location, come back.”

**Abbate:**

Ooh.

### Working on Whirlwind at MIT

**Clapp:**

And that was that. So I went down the street to MIT. When you live in
Cambridge, what other option do you have? And I discovered that I was so
lucky; the timing was just perfect. They had just spun off from the
Servo Lab a digital computer lab at MIT that was just starting up, and
they were really anxious to get people, and they didn’t even know what
kind of people they needed or how to pick them. So the team was just
forming, and we were designing a new computer. And the computer was
going to be used for—we didn’t know what. Oh yes, that’s a very
interesting story. It was originally going to be used as a flight
simulator.

**Abbate:**

This is the Whirlwind computer.

**Clapp:**

Yes. But it was going to be a flight simulator, and it was going to be
analog. And the idea was that instead of wasting or periling your
aircraft, you could train people to learn to fly a cockpit simulator
with all this in analog. And there’s a whole story that goes with that,
but the result of that was that somebody said, “I think we ought to try
digital technology instead of analog.” So, when I arrived, we were being
challenged to keep our money, because it was no longer the original
project, because the computer became more important than the cockpit
simulator. So we were in a competition to keep the money from the Air
Force. (Originally it had been Navy money; I don’t have all the details
exactly right, but they are obtainable through this history.) My role
was to help program an air defense system, and we had maybe 512 or 256
words of memory. We had to fit the whole thing into this little
experimental computer. It had storage tubes . . . . We actually put
together what today would look like a very trivial game, because we had
a little screen, and we had a gun or something that you—and we simulated
an attack on the United States, and all these planes coming in, and you
zapped them. And we did all this in like five straight days. It was over
Thanksgiving, and all of us just worked straight through to get this
thing done in time, and we all remembered that . . . I think the
camaraderie was one of the outstanding things about those days. We
worked together, we played together—days, nights, weekends¬—we were all
together, and we had no precedent for anything we did. We had to invent
every solution, and that’s something I think that made an equality among
the people.

**Abbate:**

Who were you working with?

**Clapp:**

They were all—the particular group I was working with, they were all
engineers. They were either MIT graduates, or they were graduate
students, or people who had been hired to come there. The women in the
group were—this is not to say that there weren’t other women; there were
some other women—but this particular group that became so close, in
terms of work and play and everything else, the women there tended to be
the women who were the secretaries, the computer operators . . . And I
don’t honestly recall any of the professional staff (I’ll call them),
except myself, in that group.

**Abbate:**

So you were the only woman programmer on that particular team.

**Clapp:**

Right. But there were other women who came, and eventually there were
some marriages from some of those, and some long-term relationships from
some of those. So it was a total life of doing something very exciting
and recognizing no distinctions among people—so yes, the secretaries
were as much a part of the team, and the computer operators, and all the
other people—because we were all working on solving a problem, and
getting something done for the first time—which I think is an experience
that everybody should have. It’s very exciting, it’s very stimulating,
and it is all-consuming. So that’s sort of what it was like. Some of
those people are still around; some I’m still in touch with, some have
disappeared, we don’t know where; but I think all of them felt the same
way about it. And we did, in fact, succeed in what we were doing, and
managed to get funding, and eventually what we were doing became so big
that MIT decided it was too big for their applied research. And that’s
when they formed Lincoln Lab.

**Abbate:**

And this was the SAGE Project at that point?

**Clapp:**

Right, because the little prototype was called the Cape Cod System,
because it only did a couple of aircraft out at Cape Cod. It had radio,
telephone—every kind of communication—and was really innovative. And so
from there we moved over to Lincoln Lab—and grew and grew and grew.

**Abbate:**

Let me backtrack a little. The first computer you worked on was Howard
Aiken’s Mark I?

**Clapp:**

Yes. And he had a better one there, but I guess for us students, that
was about as basic as you could get.

**Abbate:**

You hadn’t used a computer before you went to Harvard?

**Clapp:**

No.

**Abbate:**

Did you already know you wanted to?

**Clapp:**

Never heard of them. I went . . .

**Abbate:**

So Applied Science, \your field of study at Harvard,\ was. . .

**Clapp:**

I just fell into it when I got there. A lot of it was electronics,
numerical analysis, things like that.

**Abbate:**

Did you immediately know when you first used a computer, “Ah, this is
really neat, I really want to do this”?

**Clapp:**

I must have, because I mean, the jobs I was talking to him about
certainly dealt with that, and when I went over to MIT I just
immediately gravitated to this digital computer lab. Yes, so I’m sure by
then I knew that it was computers—partially for the reason I said: Here
was an opportunity to do something that people hadn’t done before. I
also don’t think it even occurred to me to worry about being a woman or
not. I just saw them hungry for people, and that was true. While I was
there I was promoted to head up a group, and again, that didn’t seem to
cause any problems among the men there either, as far as I can tell. I
think it’s conceivable that at the highest levels in the organization
they weren’t that aware of women, or else it didn’t make any difference
to them. I’m sure there were not that many people attending MIT that
were female at that time, as far as I can recall, because this is now
the early ‘50s. By the time . . . I forget when we went to Lincoln Lab,
but again we could find that out . . . and then eventually we became too
big for Lincoln Lab, and that’s how MITRE was formed. So I went to MITRE
in ‘58, I think. I never, ever, applied for another job in my life\!
\laughter\ My job just kept moving to different places, and different
responsibilities, and with it a technology that was developing so fast,
I just . . . I never had to say, “Okay, I’m bored with this job, I think
I’ll go find another job.” There was always something new to learn,
something new to create, some other big leap to take, and that’s how I
wound up my career, just never applying for another job.

### From Batch Processing to Interactive Systems

**Abbate:**

What was it like to use these early computers like the Whirlwind? What
did you actually have to do? What was the interface? What were the
problems?

**Clapp:**

Ah. Those were batch jobs, and . . . or else you had to schedule time,
because one person at a time could use the computer, and so you tended
to use punch cards, and you tended to set up test runs to get the most
out of your turn on the computer, and then you were off again and trying
to figure out what your results were, and then put in another set of
runs. So it was hardly what you’d call interactive: very batch-oriented
and very scheduled and very measured, in terms of when you could get on.
I can remember the first time. I was working with a group of people on
“What kinds of tools should we have for helping programmers to
program?” And one of the things that we developed was something called a
“checker,” and what this let you do was say, “I’m going to run this run,
and here are my expected outputs, and please check what I have \the
expected outputs\ against what I got—what got computed—and tell me
what’s different.” So that was one way to help you take care of
getting your run done. Then somebody had a brilliant idea—and I don’t
know exactly who—but we were developing a system that was very markedly
different from anything that had been done by people using computers
before then. They tended to put in some sort of an algorithm, program it
so that it would run repetitively, and produce tables of outputs. And
I’m sure you’ve found that remark by Howard Aiken about how “We’ll
never need more than \half a dozen computers\”—also attributed to
someone at IBM—because by then we’d have printed all the \tables of\
Laplace transforms, and all the this, and all the that. Our system was
interactive with the user. So the user is sitting there and seeing a
display, interacting with it; the computer is responding; it’s also
receiving real-time radar data inputs. So one day someone said, “What if
I put a little place on the display where I displayed what the software
was doing?” And it was a miraculous decision that we could be sitting
there using this same territory on the screen to show our intermediate
results. Okay, so now you could program it to see what the system was
doing internally while you were \simultaneously\ watching what it was
generating externally to the user of the system. So that may have been
the first time that anybody interactively ran and debugged their
program.

**Abbate:**

Wow.

**Clapp:**

Yes. It really was just an eye-opener that you could do this.

**Abbate:**

Was that just the test versions \of the SAGE program\ that did that?

**Clapp:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

And the production version didn’t.

**Clapp:**

Well, I’ll tell you a funny story about what happened—how we learned
something about “should the test versions and the production do the same
kind of thing?” I developed one of the first database systems—not by
myself, but with a team—and you could ask it queries, and it would
respond. But machines were pretty slow in those days, so one day I put
in a query, and I left. The next morning my office was filled from floor
to ceiling with paper\! \laughs\ Because apparently it cranked and
cranked and cranked; it was supposed to be in operational mode, but it
was sending out test data that it printed, so that in case something
went wrong, we could tell what was wrong. Oh, after that we thought
seriously about whether to combine operational and test, and whether
anybody should be allowed to walk off while their run is going. But the
other thing that happened was that we discovered in these online systems
that people get very impatient if they don’t know whether the system has
crashed—believe it or not, software crashed, even in those days, or
froze—and also whether it was just churning away at your job. As you
know, you get this little thing that flips up and down now on
your—\an\ hourglass or whatever you got, that tells you that the
computer \is working on a task\ . . . Well, we didn’t know that. So we
had one online thing that you could do, and that was to see what the
time was. Don’t ask—I think that was part of what you were asking
for—that was kind of to test if the system was still alive. Well, the
users found out about that, and pretty soon we couldn’t get any work
done, because all the computer was getting was requests for time\!
\laughter.\ Because everybody wanted to know, “Are you alive? Are you
alive? Are you alive?” And of course it would respond, because that was
priority; and it never got its work done. So we learned a lot about
combining, first of all, interactive features in a system, and also test
information for us, along with information for the user, which the user
rapidly found might be useful for them. So those were just some of the
learning curve for how you develop interactive systems and you debug
them.

**Abbate:**

Because that would have been one of the very first interactive systems,
as I understand it . . .

**Clapp:**

It was. Yes, I don’t know of any other. Sitting down and talking with
the people who were working on the several different machines at
Pennsylvania, all they did was, they knew how to program that computer
by changing—they actually had to change some of the wiring, like a
telephone switchboard—but once you did that, it just cranked away, and
cranked away, and printed—they were tables for aiming guns, and
ballistics, and all kinds of things like that. And here we were with
this interactive system that had a display, and the equivalent of a
cursor; it had a light gun, and things like that—it was a whole other
world. But it just took us a while to realize that it was also available
to the programmers—that we could use it interactively. So that’s kind of
what it was like to program. You usually had to get everything right,
submit it, and hope that it worked the first time. And of course it
never did\! There were two styles \of programmers\. There was what we
used to call the “Mod Zero Person,” meaning the very first mod of their
program worked, because they spent weeks playing computer and stepping
through everything. And then there were those who said, “Let the
computer tell me what’s wrong,” and so you might have twenty versions
before you got it working. But batch \processing\ made you have to
think about an approach to how you were going to program. The other
thing you might be interested in, if you ask about programming, is: The
first programs were written in almost-binary—hex, maybe: hexadecimal—so
there were only absolute addresses, and if you made a change—changed
where something was located—you had to go change all the references to
it. The first time somebody invented symbolic kinds of programming—this
is what you would call assembler input—I was working with a group of
engineers who said, “That’s dangerous\! We won’t do it\!” \laughter.\
I’m not joking.

**Abbate:**

In what sense was it dangerous?

**Clapp:**

Well, you haven’t got total control. You have something that is
calculating that when you say, “goto A,” and you put an A here, it’s
really going to go to the right place. And furthermore, we then got into
relocateable code; so it wasn’t that you were putting it in location
100, but it was loading it all relative to where it started. And I
guess, for some reason—I still sometimes talk to the person who told me,
“No way, we’re not going to do that\!” \laughter.\ It’s very funny. A
lot of things like that, where you had resistance to change, and not
trusting . . . So we used assembly language fairly early, and then we
had an operating system, a time-sharing system, which was developed at
MIT. But our original operating system—for the SAGE system—had to deal
with multiple processes going on, and multiple users simultaneously
using the system. And that was a very complex, very large piece of the
whole system, probably the guts of the whole thing. And I believe, when
you talk to Marlene \Hazle\, that’s one of the courses she taught—was
the operating system, because it was so complex.

**Abbate:**

You had core memory at some point?

**Clapp:**

That was introduced later. We first had these Williams storage tubes,
which were very flaky; they tended to leak, and you had . . . things
just flowed from one memory cell to another\! \laughs\ So, reliability
. . . There are some wonderful articles about the reliability of the
early computers—you know, getting five minutes of absolutely working
system was considered good, and it goes on. Some of the Bob Everett
articles—retrospective—talk about that. I think there’s an issue of the
Annals of the History of Computing on the SAGE system that will have
some of those things in it.

**Abbate:**

How did that change your work, to have the core memory instead?

**Clapp:**

Well, reliability was probably the biggest thing, and speed.

**Abbate:**

Did you have more memory to work with at that point?

### The Start of Egoless Programming

**Clapp:**

Oh yes. And we moved to one thousand twenty-four, then two thousand
forty-eight. Giant leaps\! Oh, it was interesting for another reason,
because you spent so much time trying to cram things in, being clever
rather than being straightforward, that we used to have a contest. We’d
post something, \a piece of code,\ and say—there were either of two
kinds: “Can you make this shorter?” or “Can you figure out what this
does?” \laughter.\ And when somebody came along with “egoless
programming”—have you heard of Jerry—Gerald—Weinberg’s Egoless
Programming?

**Abbate:**

\Shakes head.\

**Clapp:**

Oh\! That’s amazing. When people wrote software in those days, they
believed it was their property, so someone would go on vacation, and you
were convinced while he was gone that all the failures in the system
were in his code. So you’d go get his code and look at it, and he’d come
back and say, “You had no right to do that\! That’s private\! That’s my
code\!” Okay, and that concept existed, even among the team, that the
code was yours; and you delivered what you were supposed to deliver, and
it was nobody else’s business. Egoless Programming was a book that came
out that said, “Wait a minute; we’re all”—it probably seems strange to
you today, that somebody would come up with a concept that we are all
here together, and everything you write is a contribution to the system,
and you have to show this to people: show people your code\! And then of
course we eventually had code inspections, and people were allowed not
only to look at it but to critique it. It’s hard to believe what a big
step that was, that someone actually wrote a book, and it was a very
influential book\!

**Abbate:**

So there must have been no concept that in the future, someone else
might have to maintain your code.

**Clapp:**

I guess not\! \laughter.\ “No, that’s my code\! You can’t have it\!”
Well, maybe the attitude was that it was never going to change. It’s
funny, because—I don’t remember the date, but I have an article I wrote
on maintaining software systems. I have a whole folder, and I introduced
the concept that “Even if”—I had a quote from someone else, right at the
start: “Even if the system were perfectly implemented, and met every one
of your requirements, it would still require maintenance. Because not
only, as you got to use the system, would you change what you wanted;
but even software wore out—the way we had hardware curves—and it wore
out because there were hidden errors that only surfaced when tables
reached their limits, or slowly things eroded. Just introducing that
whole concept that you’re going to have to start planning for
maintenance of these systems—never occurred to anybody\! That was an
interesting insight that you had.

**Abbate:**

And I guess at the beginning . . .

**Clapp:**

Just getting it going was \enough\\! \[laughter.\] Do you know that
the SAGE system stayed in operation 25 years?

**Abbate:**

That’s to the ‘80s or something?

**Clapp:**

Yes. ‘85, maybe?

**Abbate:**

Was that with the original code?

**Clapp:**

Well, I don’t know how much maintenance they had to do to it. I know
some of the things, like things that they were tracking got faster than
they actually could handle. Let’s say the fastest thing was, I don’t
know, 600 miles an hour? And then all of a sudden you’ve got things
going twice that speed, and it wasn’t programmed for that range. There
were things like that, of course. I’m sure they must have had to
maintain it. I don’t know who maintained it. I think maybe SDC, and
whatever they became—they got bought by somebody, too. So, yes, we were
the glorious ones that wrote it and then moved on\! \laughter.\

**Abbate:**

Lucky you.

**Clapp:**

We did, yes, I even spent some time at one of the sites up at Syracuse,
doing what was called the Command Center, which was a higher level we
were developing. Having developed the original, we were now developing
it for the consolidation of a bunch of these centers to a higher center.
We developed that system right there.

### Being a Pregnant Woman at MITRE

**Abbate:**

Is that an underground bunker or something? \Note: Abbate was referring
to the SAGE site at Syracuse, but Clapp’s reply refers to a building at
Lincoln Lab in Lexington.\

**Clapp:**

Well it looked like that—it had no windows\! Well, the building at
Lincoln Lab is still there, and I have people who are working in it
still: no windows. Which reminds me of an anecdote I have to tell you.
My daughter was born in 1965\. At that time, they had a rule that
pregnant women could not work.

**Abbate:**

This was at MITRE, at this point?

**Clapp:**

Yes. But I was working in a building over at Lincoln Lab, anyway—in this
bunker building. So I thought about it, and I said, “Okay, I’m not going
to say anything; I’m not going to tell anybody I’m pregnant. I’ll just
keep working and see what happens.” \laughter.\ I think I was six and
a half months pregnant when somebody who hadn’t seen me in about a year
came up and he said, “You dummies, don’t you recognize a pregnant woman
when you see one?” Well, people were too embarrassed to say anything. So
right away they called me on the carpet and they said, “Are you
pregnant?” And I said, “Yes.” And I was going to lie and say that I was
only a few months pregnant, but I consulted my doctor and he said, “Bad
idea, because then when your baby’s born they’ll think it’s premature at
the hospital. So we’re not going to lie; you’ll have to tell them you’re
over six and a half months pregnant.” They had A-line dresses in those
days . . . \laughter.\ So I said, “Yes I am.” And they said, “Well,
you can’t stay here; you’re an insurance risk.” I said, “An insurance
risk?” “You might fall, and we’d get sued, and da da da da,” all these
things. So I said, “Okay, I want to take a leave.” And they said,
“Sorry, we only give leaves for personal reasons.” I said, “Can you
think of anything more personal than being pregnant?” \laughter.\ And
they said, “No, we have things like a death in the family, or having to
help out in the family business, or something; we don’t have pregnancy
in here.” I said, “Okay, bye-bye, I’m going.” And I left that very same
day. Well of course, I was right in the middle of developing some part
of the SAGE system still—yes, I remember, because it was tracking—and
they called me up and they said, “Ooh, we need you\! The team can’t go
on without you\!” So I said, “Hire me as a consultant\!” And they said,
“Okay, but you’re not allowed in the building, because you’re an
insurance risk.” So we had a coffee table and chairs in the lobby, and
we all worked there all day, and I made more money in two weeks than I’d
ever made in my life. \laughter.\ At the end of two weeks, they said,
“We’re reconsidering your being a consultant,” because I was getting
paid by the hour. \laughter.\ “We think we’re going to change the
rules. It’s okay: You can work until—whatever, ninth month or
something—and then you get thirty days off.” No, I may have gotten two
months off, after the baby was born, and then I went back to work. I
don’t know—it’d be interesting to see if I got paid, or whether I just
got leave and I could be reinstated. And they said, “Well, no one ever
wanted to come back after they had a baby before, so we didn’t know what
to do\!” So that story rapidly changed the rules.

**Abbate:**

That’s great.

**Clapp:**

Isn’t that funny? And after that, some woman at Lincoln Lab worked
Friday afternoon and had her baby Friday night\! They were all talking
about that: “See, you can work right till the last minute\!” Now I don’t
know what the rule is about how long you can choose to stay away; you
can do whatever you want, I think—but in those days that was a huge
concession, that they were going to let me come back after. So: a
curious story about being a woman in an industry that wasn’t used to
women.

**Abbate:**

That’s great, though, that they . . .

**Clapp:**

That they were able to change? Well, they couldn’t think what to do;
they were losing money paying me by the hour\!

**Abbate:**

Well, if they realized that their own policy was so dysfunctional . . .

**Clapp:**

They did.

**Abbate:**

And then . . .

**Clapp:**

Well, you know, I had something from the Department of Labor, and they
interviewed me about whether pregnancy should be considered a
disability. And I remember saying at that time—this preceded my being
pregnant—I said, “I don’t think it’s a disability. I think if you have a
heart attack, and you take off time, you can’t honestly say whether you
will come back or not; it depends on your recovery. But I think a
pregnancy is much more your own decision—unless something really goes
wrong—about whether you choose to come back or not.” They were trying to
avoid having people get paid for pregnancy leave and then never come
back, okay; they were trying to see whether people would take advantage
of it. And I did say that I thought it was distinctly different from
having a heart attack or some other . . .that it wasn’t an ailment; it
was a life decision or whatever. \laughter.\ But these were the kinds
of things people were trying to figure out: How does this affect women?
What should we do about it that’s fair? But they had never thought about
it, until it got put in their face.

**Abbate:**

It would be interesting to know when they started giving men family
leave, if they even did.

**Clapp:**

A whole lot later, a whole lot later. That’s right. So, that’s the story
of my transition to motherhood.

**Abbate:**

Were there any other cases where you felt like you being a woman was any
kind of obstacle in terms of promotions, or . . . ?

**Clapp:**

Not me personally. But I became a manager, and I did a lot of hiring,
and I encountered some incredible misconceptions. I had a boss who said,
“We shouldn’t hire women because: Number one, they don’t need the money,
so they’re not going to work as hard. They usually get married, and
somebody else, or their parents, support them.” Okay? “Number two,
they’re going to be sick more—yeah, they get sick much more often than
men.” \laughter.\ “Then, we’ll get ‘em fully trained and they’re going
to go have children and leave us, after we spent all this money training
them.” Okay? And on and on about how really, given a choice, you
shouldn’t hire a woman. So I took a bunch of resumes, and I blocked
out everything that would indicate whether they were male or female, and
fed them through the system, just to see if you couldn’t tell. Would it
make a difference in who they invited in? And I think I taught them a
lesson. I hope I did. The other thing that’s . . . a couple things . . .
Again, none of these affected me, except being a witness to them and
saying, “Wait a minute guys; that’s not right\!” We used to have a whole
bunch of stories about, if you were sitting in a room with a bunch of
men having a meeting—and it happened to me, and it happened to other
people—and somebody outside couldn’t . . . well first of all, if they
wanted coffee, you were always the one—and sometimes you just
automatically assumed you were the one—that went out and got the coffee
for everybody.

**Abbate:**

Hm.

**Clapp:**

Similarly, somebody couldn’t find a secretary—and we all laughed about
this one for a long time—and he’d be out there trying to use a
typewriter (shows you how long ago), and he’d look in and say, “Judy, do
you know how to change the ribbon?” Never asked a man; of course it was
something I’d know how to do, right? And I’d say “Sorry, no.”
\laughter.\ But there were many cases where people just assumed a
different role; even though you were a peer in the work that was going
on, when it came to something a little bit off, in a social
situation—whatever—they would ask you to do it. And you just—sometimes
you didn’t even realize that you fell into it—that you would go get the
coffee\!

**Abbate:**

Did you ever stop getting the coffee?

**Clapp:**

Eventually\! \laughter.\ But it takes you a while to realize that
you’re doing it\! Yeah, you’re the hostess person. If you were in your
house, and your husband and you were there, and people wanted coffee,
you’re the one who got it, right? Well here’s a room full of husbands\!
\laughter\—in name or not. So there were lots of things like that. As
far as promotions were concerned: We had a group that formed themselves
in my company, and they called themselves the Professional Women’s
Group. The reason they did that—and I didn’t feel the need for it; I was
very protected in a sense, because I’d been there so long, and I knew
all the right people who had moved up through the organization at the
same time that I had, that I had a high enough position that I never was
aware of how they felt. They felt that people couldn’t distinguish them
from secretaries; so when they called themselves the Professional
Women’s Group, they were trying to say, “We are different; we are not
secretaries.” Which in turn made the secretaries say, “I’m
professional\! I want to join their group\!” I mean, they created among
women an artificial barrier. One of the things that they did that I
found very refreshing and interesting—and when I say “they,” I really
was a part of it, but I felt that it was their need, not mine, that was
driving it—they said, “We want to understand how salaries are
administered.” And they went, and they found a vice president who was
willing to talk about it. I knew how it was done, and it was hush-hush,
you know. He gave a talk, and the room was jammed with men who had never
had the nerve to ask. They did that, and it was amazing. So they just
happened to be a good group of people who looked around and said, “We
want to know more about how this place works.” Now, there are people who
still feel there’s gender bias. And I have trouble now, at my stage,
knowing how right or wrong they are, because in my area, people did not
to me seem to be treated differently—males and females. I believe it’s
fine. I may be wrong. And sometimes people come and complain to
me—women—because I do a lot of mentoring, and I listen to them, and
I’m not at all sure that they haven’t put the blame on being female, as
opposed to not recognizing that it’s something about their attitude
that’s doing it. They’ll be given opportunities; they don’t do
anything with them; and they don’t recognize it. So, to me it’s a
difficult issue as to whether the bias is still there. It was definitely
there in the beginning, as I mentioned about hiring. Then, they hired
the women in at a lower classification—because they were women, and they
were like the women there who were going to do all the programming work
and nothing creative, and all that kind of thing—until somebody took a
look, in Affirmative Action, and then in one fell swoop they were all
promoted to full staff.

**Abbate:**

Was there a different title if you were a male programmer or a female
programmer?

**Clapp:**

There was. Same college degrees and everything. It was also a snobbism
about being an engineer or not. The company had a lot of engineers, and
I remember arguing—with people who eventually became the president of
the company—that “Engineering was much harder, much harder, than what
‘we women did’—than software.” Okay? And in fact I remember a
discussion with Barbara Liskov—she used to work at MITRE, and we worked
together—and she said, “Oh yeah\! These engineers, they say, ‘I can
write FORTRAN; I can write everything I need\!’“ And she said, “But, if
you had to run it over and over, can you make it run efficiently? Can
you make sure it’s correct for all values? Do you really test it?” And
she went on and on about some of the important things that they couldn’t
do. So that was always part of the rivalry: “We do ‘women’s work’; they
do ‘engineers’ work.” Men, it made a big difference in their world,
because they were all “hard” electrical engineers, and things like
that—until we got a few of them into the company too.

**Abbate:**

A few women engineers?

**Clapp:**

Sure, yes.

### MITRE as a Government Funded R & D Center

**Abbate:**

Were you working directly with clients of MITRE’s, or just internally? I
don’t know who was buying those systems. Were these government
contracts, mainly?

**Clapp:**

We are what’s called a Federally Funded—FF—Research and Development
Center. We can only work for governments—no other. We don’t compete. We
can only work for U.S. governments, foreign governments, state
governments, local governments, nonprofit, in the public interest. Like
utilities, banking (if there’s a banking organization); the F.A.A. is
one of our big customers. We used to work for the Department of Justice.
We work for the I.R.S. \laughter.\

**Abbate:**

And were you interacting directly with any of these . . .

**Clapp:**

Customers?

**Abbate:**

. . . customers, yes.

**Clapp:**

Oh sure. You have to. When you’re building a system, you’ve got to
understand who they are and what they need.

**Abbate:**

Did you find . . . Do you think as a woman, those interactions were
affected in any way towards them . . . were they surprised?

**Clapp:**

Ah, that’s interesting. I guess I wasn’t self-conscious enough. I mean,
I just . . . Having grown up with the system, I didn’t worry as much
about those things, and that’s why I always wondered if the people who
came after me, the women who came after me, were more self-conscious, or
. . . We would just laugh it off—you know, no, never worried about it.
But yes, they were very military, and very hierarchical, and there were
a lot of people, a lot of women, who did feel . . . \Women\ who worked
much more on a day-to-day basis. I tended to come in and go, so my—I
didn’t have to work—there are people who literally sat in and worked
next to a whole military establishment; I never did that. So in my case,
I came in at a level that I just didn’t even think about it. I would
teach courses where they were all relatively high-ranking people. So,
no, it was not a problem for me, but that is not to say that it wasn’t a
problem for other people—until we began to get women officers too in the
military.

### Working in Artificial Intelligence

**Abbate:**

What were some of the other memorable projects you did at MITRE, after
SAGE?

**Clapp:**

Oh, after SAGE?

**Abbate:**

It sounds like you had quite a variety of things going on there.

**Clapp:**

I think my work shifted from being an implementer of systems . . .
Actually, I led a department for a while that was doing a lot of
innovative work in artificial intelligence, so most of what we were
doing was research. And one of the first systems we actually delivered
was an experimental system to monitor the loading of oxygen on the NASA
shuttle flights.

**Abbate:**

Interesting.

**Clapp:**

Yes, it was. It was fascinating, for a couple of reasons: One of the
things we did was, we had to map all of the connections of all the
sensors and all the systems in the—the various parts of the system—that
opened and closed, you know, and let the oxygen flow. And I think people
were more enamored of having all of that online and being able to not go
through the stacks and stacks of paper and say, “Oh, we’ve got to zoom
down into that one valve; let’s go see where that is,” and that’s the
hundredth page down . . . You know, they could just work their way
through it. But we also had logic that looked at the consistency of what
they were doing and could say whether the problem might really be in the
sensor and not in the oxygen flow. So there were a number of projects
like that. None of—except for that one, which they may have used
experimentally for a while—most of them were running labs for people to
prototype what systems would look like, proving that you could automate
systems. I think that was a big thing, to show people what it would be
like to have a system that had displays with which they could interact—a
lot of database, what would happen if you could access your database
online. All systems priming the pump, sort of, to get somebody to go and
develop the real system. And then I moved from that to more of what I do
now, which is dealing with the management aspect of how you manage the
development of these systems: what kinds of . . . When you have a system
that’s very large and very complex—imagine, for instance: I was just
talking to people about an upgrade to the systems we use for the FAA—you
know, how do you do that so that the system you deliver works, satisfies
the user, and is efficient, and on schedule, and all these things that
software—large software projects—are notorious for not being able to do.
So I started going on a lot of what we call “red teams,” where there’s a
program that has a problem, and you go in and you spend a few days
interviewing people, and you come back and you say, “I think I know what
the problem is; here’s what you have to fix,” or “Uh-uh, there’s no way
to fix this; you’d better go back and start over a different way.”
Unfortunately, there are too many opportunities for that kind of a job,
where you just go off and look at a program in trouble, and try and see
if you can figure out how you can get it back on track.

**Abbate:**

Are you usually able to do that?

**Clapp:**

Nobody ever gets back on track that quickly, no—because by the time they
report it, it’s way down the line. So now, what we’re working hard on
is: How do you stop sooner; what are the early warning signs? \TAPE 1,
SIDE 2\ And now there’s a report that just came out, and it came out a
few years ago also, on the percentage of large system developments that
are late, that never get completed. It’s just the way it is. So it’s not
been easy to find the successful program—the first-time-around
successful. But obviously, we field systems, so . . .

**Abbate:**

Do you think that’s any different between government and industry?

**Clapp:**

No, we have industry figures, too. Government is another whole issue,
but the government is constrained in ways that industry isn’t. We have
to do a much more formal competition in the government, because of
fairness and all that sort of thing; and it’s very hard to fire someone.
You can’t just say, “guys, this isn’t working; let’s stop.” It’s very,
very hard. So, as a result, you know you often work really hard to see
if you can’t make what you have going work. This is not always possible.
So, for the most part, it’s similar to industry, except for the fact
that they can make deals that benefit both parties, and they can fire
people—fire companies that are developing for them.

### On Understanding the Client and Developing Systems

**Abbate:**

It sounds like your work really requires you to know a lot about the
client’s application. You know, like the oxygen system: It sounds like
you would need to know about the engineering of that just to even design
it. So it’s much more than just knowing how to code.

**Clapp:**

Oh sure. In fact, the programming, as you know, is probably supposed to
be about 20 percent of the effort, in the typical “Waterfall” model. Now
we’re into totally different models, where they’re either evolutionary
or spiral, where most of the work is in understanding the needs of the
ultimate—the end-user of the system. Not only that: We just ran a
conference last week on—“Change Management and Technology Diffusion” was
the title of our conference that another woman and I ran—and the idea
is, how do you get the organization to change when the new technology is
there? It’s like—did you ever read Berners-Lee’s book on Weaving the
Web?

**Abbate:**

Yes.

**Clapp:**

Well, you see how hard it was for him to get people to adopt the
technology? And then there has to be a critical mass, or it’s no good.
If I’m the only one on this web, all by myself, what good is it? Right?
That’s the kind of thing that we deal with, a lot: how you get people
not just to reproduce what they’ve always done, or to say to you, “I’m
too busy doing what I’m doing, so go away; I don’t have time to listen
to you\!” Right? That’s a constant thing\! You know: “I’m so overwhelmed
with work, I can’t listen to you\!” And you say, “But I’m here to
help\!” “Oh, yeah, I heard that before, and then . . . ” Well anyway .
. . So we’re looking a lot at that process. When you try to introduce
new technology, how do you get people to adapt what they used to do to
what you can offer them?

**Abbate:**

I don’t think I’ve heard of those models before—the Waterfall? What is
that supposed to be?

**Clapp:**

Ah\! The Waterfall Model is a classical model of the development of a
system, and it says, “I am going to nail down every requirement, right
at the beginning. You tell me everything you want, and then I’ll go off
and I’ll design the system, and I’ll code it, and then I’ll test it
against what you told me—what you told me as best you could, of
course—and then I’ll deliver the system.” And the time frame has
traditionally—in the early times when we were developing systems—that
could be four or five years. Well, five years later, what’s happened?
It’s a different set of users, a different technology, and a different
set of requirements. So this system that we spent five years developing
is no longer relevant to those people\! So the evolutionary one says, “I
think what we’ll do is we’ll develop you a system that only does part of
the job, and you start using it; and you come back and tell us how you’d
like to change it. And when that happens, we’ll . . .”—I mean this is
part of—also what I have been working on is new models, and getting
people to adopt new models, and new management tools . . . So now the
evolutionary approach says, “I’m never going to get it right; what I
should do is get it out—get something out; and then you guys use it, and
you tell me whether it’s doing your job or not. And then we’ll go back
and we’ll keep iterating.” That’s what evolutionary is. Spiral makes the
evolution go faster, because it says: “I’m going to do some experiments,
and as a result of the experiments, we’ll decide whether to really
engineer a system—because the experiment doesn’t have to be quite as
robust. But \for example,\ what would it be like for you if you had a
phone that you could get your email off? Why don’t I give you one? You
may not be able to get it in every area yet, and it may not be fast, but
does that help you?” Okay, and then you say, “Yeah, that’s a good
experiment,” or “No, you know what’s wrong with that? I don’t have
anything to write down the email with,” or “Is it going to read it to
me? I couldn’t understand it; we need better speech
generation”—whatever. So, it’s like that: It doesn’t say, “You don’t
have to tell me anything you think you’ll ever want, because you’re not
gonna talk to me again for five years\!” \laughter.\

**Abbate:**

I don’t think I understand the waterfall metaphor.

**Clapp:**

The waterfall is: We go only forward from requirements, to design, to
code, to test, to field.

**Abbate:**

You can’t get back up the waterfall.

**Clapp:**

Well, little tiny backs—but not back that whole distance. Okay, that’s
why it’s called “waterfall.” That’s a term that’s been around ever since
. . . And then the evolutionary is something that I worked on a team
that—with industry—that we pushed, probably in the early ‘80s; but it
never quite caught on until people realized that they couldn’t wait five
years anymore, because the technology moves so fast\! You know, somebody
was designing a system in the old Waterfall way, and they had all the
requirements, and they had a mainframe computer. Well, the next batch of
people graduating from college had laptops, and they said, “I’m not
waiting for that system\!” And they started developing the software
themselves on their laptops, and pretty soon they discovered that nobody
wanted this big system, because everybody had . . . It wasn’t as good on
the laptops—they weren’t as thorough, it wasn’t as integrated, it didn’t
do as many things—but it was theirs, and they used it. Whereas this big
system was still being developed. So they had to abandon it, and say,
“Aha\!” \laughter.\ “We have to go back. People are smarter,
technology is smaller; do it different.” So\! Now we’re putting web
front-ends on these old systems, because we never had web front-ends. So
yes, the technology is driving the development these days.

**Abbate:**

How long did the old systems last? If you’re developing something in the
‘70s, let’s say, how long would that be used?

**Clapp:**

Ten or 15 years, at least. Well, I told you, the SAGE system—25 years\!
Do you know that in order to keep it going, they had a company that blew
the vacuum tubes? The glass vacuum tubes? Because nobody used vacuum
tubes anymore.

**Abbate:**

They were still using vacuum tubes . . . ?

**Clapp:**

Yes, yes. So they had a company that still supplied them. Right. Now,
systems are around ten or 15 years. I worked in my own company in an
internal administrative data processing system. Totally batch-driven:
paychecks came out every week, or whenever we got them; time sheets got
reported for the accountants; they had the most elaborate diagram of the
order in which you had to run every batch job. Someone came to see me a
few years ago, ‘cause they’d decided after—I don’t know how many
years—that they were going to replace it. And this young man said to
me, “You know what?” he said, “that system was built before I was
born\!” And I said, “And I wrote part of it\!” \laughter.\ That’s
the truth\! That’s how long these systems stayed around.

### Solving Y2K Problems

**Abbate:**

Did you have any Y2K issues you had to deal with?

**Clapp:**

Oh, I worked on Y2K for a whole year\! Oh yes. Matter of fact, I’ve got
a computer downstairs that won’t run anymore but has all my accounting
stuff up till 2000\. In order to move it to my new system I would have
had to do 12 steps to convert the data, so I keep this old Mac around,
just in case I need anything before 2000\. It was too small and too old
to be able to upgrade to the new software—didn’t have a big enough
memory\! And that’s another whole story, about what’s happened to
memory. I mean, every time we move up, things are bigger . . . So yes, I
worked for a whole year on looking at how we were going to track that
problem in the—I worked primarily for the Air Force—in the Air Force
systems. And just generally, what techniques could be used, and tracking
the status of all these systems, which often were interdependent. It was
a very big job for us; yes.

**Abbate:**

Everything got fixed successfully?

**Clapp:**

Well, as a matter of fact, after it was all over, we sat down and said,
“How come we thought it was such a big deal?” \laughter.\ It didn’t
happen\! You know, it did a lot of good. It got people—not only in our
systems, but we did a lot more of good-will type work with other people,
and other places—it got people for the first time to realize—you were
talking about the question of maintenance?—how many systems they were
running that they had no listings for; how many had nobody who knew
anything about them anymore. As one man said to me, “I was going to
modernize my system in a couple years, but this kind of made me do it
that year.” And he said, “You know what? With the new, modernized
system, I’m saving money\!” So for a lot of people, it helped. It just
forced it early. So, all right\! I’m trying to think if there are any
other, earlier anecdotes that I can tell you about. The “good old
days\!” \laughter\ They really were . . . good old days. I remember
one day talking to somebody I worked with, a man who had like five or
six children, and he said, “Oh, I am so tired,” or something like that,
“when I go home from work.” He said, “I wish I had a different job.” I
said, “You don’t enjoy your work?” He said, “No, I have six children to
support.” I said, “I’m so sorry, because I love what I do\! I don’t have
six children, but I still have to support a lifestyle.” I was surprised
to know that somebody was coming to work every day and looking
enthusiastic, but hating it. And he went off and started his own
company, and he loves what he does now. So there you are\!

### How Computing Has Changed

**Abbate:**

How do you think it’s changed over time? Your workplace, or computing in
general?

**Clapp:**

As I say, it’s gotten less and less hands-on. When my daughter was in
high school—high school? college\!—and she had a programming assignment,
she said, “Hey mom, we’re supposed to have a team of two, and I was the
last person, and I asked if my mom could be my team.” She said, “Will
you help me program?” And we had to program an editor—a bunch of tools,
a compiler, and I don’t know, something else. And I sat there and I
said, “Oh\!” \groans\ “I forgot about all this detail.” Because I
was—I knew all the principles about how to organize it, how to write
it, how to test it; but I made lots of mistakes, because I just wasn’t
interested in that finite level of detail. And we got an okay grade, but
. . . \laughter\

**Abbate:**

Good to know\!

**Clapp:**

Yes, that I could still do it after all those years\! But no: That’s one
way it changed. You moved more toward stepping back and saying, “What’s
really going on here, and what needs to be changed?” And then you start
talking about the management side of it. One of the big things I got
into was managing by metrics, by measures, using a lot of the techniques
that the Japanese and others had used, to sort of track what’s going
on—“Can I predict? Can I see the trends?”—and trying to impose some
sort of discipline on the management. There was almost no discipline.
You know, I talked about Egoless Programming, and people thinking it
belonged to them. But that same attitude, about: “Programmers are
artists; they don’t follow rules. You can’t expect them to follow rules.
What do you mean? This is creative work\!” \laughter.\ So, I was
involved in a lot of that kind of thing, looking at, “Gee, we really
have to police ourselves and be responsible.” And I still to this day
get angry with my mail system that comes from a certain large, large
company that just gave us another release that went backwards twenty
steps. You know, the things that don’t work anymore, plus wiping out my
address book, plus . . . How can they do this to me? And I keep writing
them letters, saying, “There’s something wrong with your . . . ” I know
what’s wrong—that’s the problem; I know where it’s wrong, and I know
when they send me a note saying, “It must be your computer; it’s not our
server,” to go back and say, “Sorry, that’s your server; it’s not my
computer\!” kind of thing, but it gets me nowhere. So I understand what
it takes to do it right, and that we have to police and discipline
ourselves more than we do, especially in a military system where you
can’t have the kind of things happen that happen on my everyday,
bought commercial product, right? So that’s one way it changes. I’m also
much more interested in developing the people that work with me and for
me. And over time I now have a completely enviable
no-management-responsibility kind of job. Yes—where I can work across
the company, and do things that are cross- cutting, and not have to do
the administrative stuff. So this is the—people come up to me and say,
“How do I get your job?” \laughter.\ I say, “You have to be here for
thirty years\!”

**Abbate:**

I’m wondering whether you thought computer jobs have become more open to
women, or less open in some ways, over the years?

**Clapp:**

Looking around, I think they’re certainly open to women. Sometimes,
though, I give a—I have a friend who is a professor of computer science
at a women’s college, and I’ve talked to her students, just graduating.
I think their role models tend to be professors. And I always say to
them—and I’m sure the professors don’t agree—that I think you should
work for a couple of years before you go on to graduate work, because
you have no idea the variety of jobs there are in the computer field
until you’ve been out there. And I try to describe just the people that
we have associated with computers, and—now I think it’s more obvious—but
when I used to talk about the effect the web had on the types of jobs
that people did related to computers . . . I’m in the process of having
a group of people, about half of whom are women, develop a web site for
me. (I used to do them myself, but this is another one of those things I
now pass on to the experts.) And there’s a human factors person with a
Ph.D.; there’s a graphics person; and there’s a database person . . .
I’ve got all these specialists now, doing all these things that I
don’t know that they learned before. Although certainly the human
factors person I think did, but the way it’s applied . . . And the other
big thing is teams: collaboration and teams. Most everything we do is
multidisciplinary, this being just a simple example of it—and, I think
in the past, universities and colleges have stressed individual work too
much. There are people like Barry Boehm who pushed assignments that
involved teams. I have a student I mentored at Harvard, who graduated a
year ago, and the first time they put her on a team, she was just so
furious\! She says, “The other members of the team are lazy. They don’t
want to do the work, they give me all the hard assignments, and they
slow-roll theirs; and they know that I care, so when I finish mine, they
say, ‘Oh well, you can do mine\!’ So I can’t tolerate this team
business\!” But that’s the way it is\!

**Abbate:**

Welcome to the real world\!

**Clapp:**

That’s what I said to her. I said, “I still run into those problems, to
this very day. And not everybody is matched to you.” And she happens to
be very quick and very bright and very dedicated. Not everybody’s going
to be as quick, as bright, and as dedicated. So, I don’t know how she’s
doing now. She’s out in the real world at a dot-com company that’s
probably going to lay her off any minute\! She moved right away to
Silicon Valley. So we’ll find out, but I know she’s on a team.

### Advice for Women Considering Computing

**Abbate:**

Do you have any other advice for young women to thinking about careers
in computing?

**Clapp:**

Well, let me think . . . I once had a woman . . . Oh: a group of women
ganged up on me. It was really amusing, and I don’t know why—it wasn’t
so amusing at the time—They said I wasn’t promoting women. And the
reason was that I had a job opening for a large lab that I ran, and I
picked a man. There was a woman who had applied and a man who had
applied, and I picked the man; and so they registered a protest that I
should have picked the woman. And I said, “What has she ever done to
demonstrate that she’s capable of this? She happens to be an expert in
Unix, and all these other things, but running a lab is a lot of other
stuff, too.” So my advice to them was two things. “Look for
opportunities to demonstrate the characteristics, or the qualities, that
the next job you want might requires.” I said, “If she had even
volunteered for the United Fund campaign, she would have shown the
ability to work on a team, to see the business side of things, if that’s
what the job happened to require. And the other thing that has served me
very well is, if you see a job that needs to be done, that you want to
do: act like it’s yours.” I’ve done this so many times, and pretty soon
\people\—all the way up to the president of the company—start thinking
it’s my job, and they start calling on me to do more\! \laughter.\ And
I’ve managed to get the job I want. So that’s one of the things: If you
look around, and you see something that needs to be done, that you would
like to be the one who does . . . . And you’d be surprised: Nobody’s
going to slap your hands for doing it—and they may even say, “Why didn’t
anybody ever do that before?” So, that’s one of the things that served
me extremely well.

**Abbate:**

Kind of inventing your own path.

**Clapp:**

Yes. Right. I mean, the one with the president of the company was that
he asked some people to write a book, and it happened to be on a topic I
was very interested in and wanted to learn more about. That’s the other
thing: use your job as an opportunity to learn something else, ‘cause I
love to learn. So I went to them; I said, “Would you like some help?”
And they said, “Ah\! Yes\!” So I started helping them. Pretty soon I
discovered I was the only one left. You know, it’s like: You’re
pedaling, and you look behind you, and no one else is there anymore?
\laughter\ So, I wound up being the person who wrote the thing, and
got the recognition, and went all over giving his talks about his
book—for his chapter in his book. And so you have fun, besides. And
they know who you are. And so you stick your neck out a little bit, and
you say, “I think I’m going to do that.” That’s the old Grace Hopper
thing.

**Abbate:**

What?

**Clapp:**

Her famous saying about, “It’s easier to ask forgiveness than
permission.”

**Abbate:**

Oh, yes.

**Clapp:**

Some variation on that. So you do it\! That’s right. And if it was the
right thing, and your instinct was right, you’ll get patted on the back;
if it wasn’t, you say, “Sorry\!”

### On Balancing Work and Family

Abbate; How have you balanced work and family over the years?

**Clapp:**

It’s been hard\! I think it’s a lot easier now, with more day care and
after-school, but for me it was hard because of having to find people to
be at home. And originally I lived in Cambridge, where there were more
women who were willing to either come to the house or take your child
there, or something, who would pick the child up after school. As time
went on, the kids in suburbia were so programmed that they had to be
here, there, and the other place, and there \would be\ nobody to
babysit. Fortunately, my husband decided to work at home.

**Abbate:**

What does he do? What did he do?

**Clapp:**

He was also involved in computers. I met him at a computer—no, I
actually met him in a Russian class at Harvard—but his opening line to
me was, “Haven’t I seen you at a computer conference?” \laughter.\ So
he was in computers too, and so we had his and her computers, and his
and her work, and so forth; and he had his own business, and he was sort
of a pioneer in time-sharing. He started the first commercial
time-sharing service in this area, and maybe anywhere.

**Abbate:**

Was that CCA? What was that?

**Clapp:**

No. CCA was Tom Merrill. That was a big database. No, it was called
DialData, and it was in about 1964, and people from MIT and all over
would dial in and use his—he had an XDS, which was Xerox; it
became—whatever they became . . .

**Abbate:**

That was SDS originally?

**Clapp:**

Right, right: large mainframe. And so he decided he would work at home.
And as more women in the neighborhood began to go to work, he was the
one they called to get somebody’s sick child home from school, and I’d
come home and find these other children in my house. And he was the one
they rang the doorbell and said, “Can you fix my bicycle?” \laughs\ So
he was the house daddy.

**Abbate:**

Quite a pioneer\!

**Clapp:**

Yes, he was. So, I was lucky that he was able to be more flexible with
his hours; and eventually he worked at Harvard and he could adjust his
hours—because I did traveling, a lot of traveling, too.

**Abbate:**

Did any of your kids go into computing?

**Clapp:**

You know, in the beginning, they didn’t want anything to do with
it—absolutely\! “I don’t want it\!” \makes gagging sound.\ And then
one of them used it extensively, because she got an MBA, and she is
still in banking; so she uses it more as a tool. She was never
interested in it any other way. The other one—they’re both women—the
other one uses it very creatively. I have absolutely no artistic talent,
and she uses it artistically. She had a business designing logos, and
tee shirts, and things for teams; and she still does a lot of
graphics-type work. But she’s the one where I was the lab partner, and
that was the last time she ever programmed anything—or we ever
programmed anything\! So no, I guess not; but in this day and age,
everybody’s into computers, one way or the other—mostly as users, I
would think. But I think that one doesn’t do that much work; she’s at
home with a baby. The other one, I think, probably got the idea that
women belong out there in the professional world from watching me. But
she’s had a lot of trouble with feeling that she’s not treated fairly.
And it could be the field that she’s in.

**Abbate:**

Which is that, graphics?

**Clapp:**

No, the other one: the banking—and broker . . . Yes, Merrill Lynch had a
big case of women not being treated fairly, and she seemed to have a
pretty strong feeling that she was not treated fairly. So it still
exists, and there will be battles for some time to come, I’m afraid.

**Abbate:**

What have been the most satisfying aspects of working with computers,
for you?

**Clapp:**

Hmm. If I were to answer today—and probably yesterday, too—I think it’s
the people that I work with. I really like them, and I find now that I’m
not as up to date on my technology, I love to be in the groups with the
brainstorming people\! I just love to see how they think and how they
work and how they apply things, and I think it’s the opportunity to
learn all the time. I say sometimes, “If I had eyes on all five fingers
of one hand, and they were all reading simultaneously, I still couldn’t
read everything I wanted to read, or know everything I wanted to know\!”
Because it is constantly changing. And the opportunities to do something
with that, I think, are very satisfying. So: not just the people I
relate to, but the opportunities you can give people to go somewhere, to
grow, to become something on their own. I’ve been at my company long
enough so that almost—they make a joke: “Almost everybody here has
worked for you at one point\!” Except for maybe the new president or
something, who came from some place else. But that happens, and I like
that you can sort of give them a hand on their way.

### What Makes a Good Mentor

**Abbate:**

Do you think you have a different approach to mentoring than male
managers?

**Clapp:**

I don’t know how many of them consciously think about it. I don’t know.
. . . I think especially in a company that’s so dominated by engineers,
sometimes I think they’re totally unaware of people and their
feelings—just totally unaware. So one of the ways I get used is as a
channel. I can go and say, “If you don’t do something, you’re going to
lose so-and-so, because they’re not happy—and here’s what you have to do
to keep them.” Or, “This group is just not pulling together, and I think
you need to get somebody to give them some help. They’re just having all
kinds of problems settling who they are, and who’s in charge of what,
and internal competition, and . . . .” You know, I can sense those
things. This was not my role when I was younger. I think when I was
younger I was probably as wrapped up in “Who am I, and where am I going,
and what do I know, and where’s my job?” So I would say, in some senses
there’s a whole other career you have after you stop worrying about what
your career is going to be. It’s sort of, “What can I do to make others
have a career that they want?” and “Where can I find another opportunity
to learn?” So . . . . And that’s very different—I’m sure that I was much
more interested in building business for my department, and, you know,
that kind of thing. I find it interesting that hardcore engineers still
value, in promoting people, their technical depth. And I had a
conversation recently with someone about a wonderful woman that I found
that I thought could be one of our new managers, and he said, “Well,
what’s her technical depth?” And I said, “Let me tell you about her. She
is one of the best team leads I’ve ever seen. She pulled a group of
people together, and she has a style for getting people to work. She has
an ability to relate to people outside; she can get new business; she
listens well; she responds; she’s bright—I have no idea, in all the time
I’ve been working with her, of what her technical background is (I
happen to believe it’s at least a masters—an MBA or something like
that), but you’re asking the wrong question. You don’t have people with
the people skills.” And that’s what they still have to see. And I said,
“A good manager can take a group of people who know more than she does
and make them productive. You’re asking . . . We have too many people
who are technically deep but can’t manage other people.” So yeah,
there’s still that—in a high-tech company—that belief that first you
have to prove yourself technically; and then if you’re lucky enough, and
you have the people skills, great. \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

So just in case your whole team gets the flu, you can personally code
the entire project\!

**Clapp:**

The entire job\! Exactly\! \laughter.\ Or if they all decide they
don’t want to work for you. That’s true: I mean, we have people like
that—women as well as men—that people just don’t want to work for. And,
if they’re an engineer, it’s because they micromanage. “I really know
how to do that. Let me tell you.”

**Abbate:**

A little too much technical depth.

**Clapp:**

Yes, exactly. Or something of that sort. So: There you have my
current-day view of life.

**Abbate:**

Has it changed a lot?

**Clapp:**

It has changed a lot, sure. I was in those scrambling days, too, where—I
don’t know that I was just hell-bent on getting promoted, but I was very
concerned about delivering a good product, getting new business, things
like that. And I just don’t remember whether being a woman was a piece
of that, or not. As I say, I may have been too thick to recognize when
it was an issue, or something\! \laughs\—and just ignoring it. And
maybe that’s another thing people have to do: Sometimes they have to act
like it isn’t there—instead of crying, “Aw, look what someone’s doing to
me again because I’m a woman”——and just treat it as if the other person
is a little near-sighted, or has a learning disability, or something,
and I’ll just go on and do my thing\!

**Abbate:**

Is the technology still fun?

**Clapp:**

Yes, I would say so\! It really is. Every week there’s something else.
As I said, this last week \I was\ working with a set of people trying
to get a web site design. I said, “My goodness, this is like being the
user—asking someone to develop a software system for me, because I don’t
know what I want until I see it.” And we’ve gone through, like, three
prototypes, and the first one, I said \gasps\, “No\! That’s not what I
wanted\!” And I thought, “They’re gonna kill me\!” The second one was a
gigantic leap toward what I want, and now I think there’ll be a third
one that will be even closer. And we’ve had to change what we wanted as
a result of seeing . . . . So yes, that was last week’s: “How do I get
an interesting web site?” And that’s not like what I used to do. That’s
more like e-commerce that says, “Here I am, come and use me\!” The old
ones, nobody had anything else, so they had to come\! This is where it
was; it was like a library on ethernet, instead of a real portal or a
web site. And we’re lucky in our company, because we have a lot of
internal courses: lectures, things like that.

**Abbate:**

Well, great. Do you have anything else to add?

**Clapp:**

No. I don’t know if you got enough of the “old days”.

**Abbate:**

Well, if you have any more anecdotes . . .

### Teamwork and Team Bonding

**Clapp:**

I’ll have to think. \Tape pauses, resumes in the middle of a
conversation about whether work teams still bond together.\

**Clapp:**

. . . people who play together—because I see some of it—but to us it was
so much a part of our lives.

**Abbate:**

When you say “play together,” you mean—

**Clapp:**

After work.

**Abbate:**

—playing around with the work, or just going and \socializing after
work\. . . . ?

**Clapp:**

Both. Yes. Playing at work— My husband had a business, and I said to
him—and I’ve said this to the people who are designing our
environment: “Everybody should have play time; that’s where you get your
real creativity; that’s where you get your real teams built.” And we’re
now in the phase of designing environments where people can just sort of
casually sit down and solve problems together. We did it \in the old
days\ because after work we all went out . . . In fact, somebody, a
bunch of them, like seven guys, rented a house—a huge mansion—one of
these things that no single family could afford anymore, but seven guys
with salaries could do, with the works. And you spent all your time
there, and you could move from playing into solving problems, so it was
an environment where the creativity just spilled over into the fun time.

**Abbate:**

When was this?

**Clapp:**

That was—in the ‘50s?

**Abbate:**

And so, a team from MITRE, or Lincoln Laboratories . . . ?

**Clapp:**

At that time we were all probably still at MIT, and Lincoln.

**Abbate:**

And you were living in this house?

**Clapp:**

I wasn’t, but the guys were.

**Abbate:**

The guys were living there, and hanging out, working . . .

**Clapp:**

They all lived together, and everybody played. Even at MIT, they—every
Friday you headed over to the Friday afternoon get-together, and they
played on teams together, and they had rugby, and lacrosse, and—no,
rugby and touch football, and all those kinds of things. And I think
people do it today, I’m just not in that range of people who do it. But
that was how much we liked our work—was that we wanted to be with each
other after work, as well. And of course we didn’t have families.
Gradually we had families, and that kept up—not quite as much, but more
people still saw each other as families. And I see that happening at
work now, too. So I suppose that’s a part of it: enjoying it as a whole
part of your life, your social life, everything. I feel bad if people
don’t have it—when it’s just a job that they go to work, they go home,
and that’s it. But it may be only at a certain stage in your life when
you’re free to do that.

**Abbate:**

Well, it may be the type of work. I mean, you really have to be working
as a team, it seems like, to have that, and if you’re just atomized
individuals . . .

**Clapp:**

That’s true.

**Abbate:**

. . . which is more like my job, unfortunately . . .

**Clapp:**

Is it? Aw . . .

**Abbate:**

Well, professors don’t really. . . there’s not as much . . .

**Clapp:**

That’s funny, because I was in a book club meeting with Barbara Liskov
this week—that’s where I saw her—or last week—and it was a picture of
academic life that was very cut-throat.

**Abbate:**

The book?

**Clapp:**

The book was. And we asked her if that was true at MIT, and she said
“No\!” But you know, it had everybody either doing their own thing, or
competing, or undercutting each other in ways that certainly weren’t
collaborative, or cooperative, or anything else. \Tape pauses.\

### On High-Order Languages

**Abbate:**

Just chatting here. An anecdote about higher-order languages.

**Clapp:**

Yes. I was thinking about when we were all writing in assembly language.
First I told you how people didn’t want to give up binary, because
assembly language removed some control over things; and then along came
higher-order languages. So I did an experiment where we wrote something
in a high-order language, and we were going to look at, “Were we really
more efficient?” and “How did it all work?” And I remember that when it
was all done, the people on the project hated it \the language\,
because what they were doing was checking up to see if it generated the
kind of assembly language they would have generated\! Nobody trusted it.
And we found out a number of other things that were wrong with it, and
so I wrote a paper—which was probably the first time anybody had ever
done it there, and I don’t know where—about why the experiment failed.
So I actually documented what went wrong with our experiment, as a
report. Normally, you know, everything was success-oriented, and here
was this report on why we failed. And of course, circumstances being
what they were, the high-order languages went on, and we learned to
accept them. But it was part of that technology transition—that we
didn’t trust it—so we examined in great detail the code that it
produced, and decided we could do better.

**Abbate:**

So the code was inefficient?

**Clapp:**

Yeah, right. But it probably didn’t have any errors in it. It wasn’t
very readable, either. I mean, they made up—not human-oriented things,
where you could put tags on things that said, “okay,” or “new page,” or
whatever you wanted to call it—there were just all these invented
strings of letters for the names of things. But that’s because we had a
built-in process that assumed that when we ran it, we were going to have
to go back and look at the assembly code it produced in order to debug
it—so that was our accepting of that. And then the same thing with the
operating systems. I remember a person I was working for saying
something about, “Oh, we wrote our operating system for the SAGE system
in 256 words; what is this operating system? Tell me: Why do they need
half of my computer for the operating system? Well, what are they doing
that I need?” And so, there’s always this technology adoption. And my
favorite story about that is that when I discovered there was something
like the Internet, early stages of it—and we had been doing experiments
with it—

**Abbate:**

MITRE was on the ARPANET . . .

**Clapp:**

Yes. But then the Web came along, and some people were doing—the
earliest thing they had was something called Gopher that would go look
for things—and I discovered three places in MITRE where, underground,
people were using this technology—not hiding it or anything, but
grass-roots. So I went to the powers that be, and I said, “There’s
something going on here that’s really great, and you’ve got to do
something about it, or else it’s just going to run wild, and we’re not
going to have anything at the corporate-wide level that uses this
technology.” And my boss said, “Forget it\! It’s only a passing fad\!”
\laughter.\ Fortunately for him, I don’t tell who he was, and I never
have, but I always cite “the boss of the moment.” And the other thing
was, of course, I didn’t let it go, and I set up the first internal Web
site that was corporate-wide. And it’s based on something at the
University of Maryland called the Software Experience Factory. You know
Vic Basili?

**Abbate:**

Yes. \Victor Basili is a computer scientist at the University of
Maryland.\ This was the early ‘90s?

**Clapp:**

Probably, yes. He said you should capture experiences and make them
available to other people. So I did: I set up a web site, and conned
people into giving me stuff, and organized it, and made it available to
people. So now I’m on the Knowledge Management Committee. That’s another
new buzz word, and that’s what my new web site is—a new kind of
knowledge management site.

**Abbate:**

I should take a look at that, if it’s public.

**Clapp:**

What? The web site? Not yet.

**Abbate:**

Okay.

**Clapp:**

But I was just talking about the difficulty in getting people to adopt
technology. Gender independent. \laughter.\

**Abbate:**

Well, I guess some of has to do with changes in the hardware. When you
get a much faster processor and much more memory, it’s a little less
imperative to be as efficient; and I think the constraints change before
people quite have adapted to the new constraints and think, “Oh, I don’t
need to . . . “

**Clapp:**

Yes. When one’s space was the biggest constraint, and you had to tune
everything to cram it in . . . . And now, when I think of the gigabytes
on my computer, and that I don’t throw things away, and they’re still
there a year later, and I haven’t run out of space . . . . Yup, that’s a
big change. I mean, memory was very expensive, and so you really, really
spent a lot of time conserving it. As I said, at the cost of additional
complexity, so . . . . No more anecdotes\!

**Abbate:**

All right.

Retrieved from
"<http:/ethw.org/index.php?title=Oral-History:Judy_Clapp&oldid=113039>"

Categories(Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* Computing and
  electronics(Category:Computing_and_electronics "Category:Computing and electronics")
* Computer
  science(Category:Computer_science "Category:Computer science")
* Software & software
  engineering(Category:Software_%26_software_engineering "Category:Software & software engineering")
* Engineering and
  society(Category:Engineering_and_society "Category:Engineering and society")
* Home & family(Category:Home_%26_family "Category:Home & family")
* Workplace(Category:Workplace "Category:Workplace")

## Contents

* 1 About Judy Clapp(#About_Judy_Clapp)
* 2 About the Interview(#About_the_Interview)
* 3 Copyright Statement(#Copyright_Statement)
* 4 Interview(#Interview)
  * 4\.1 Background and Education(#Background_and_Education)
  * 4\.2 Working on Whirlwind at MIT(#Working_on_Whirlwind_at_MIT)
  * 4\.3 From Batch Processing to Interactive
    Systems(#From_Batch_Processing_to_Interactive_Systems)
  * 4\.4 The Start of Egoless
    Programming(#The_Start_of_Egoless_Programming)
  * 4\.5 Being a Pregnant Woman at
    MITRE(#Being_a_Pregnant_Woman_at_MITRE)
  * 4\.6 MITRE as a Government Funded R & D
    Center(#MITRE_as_a_Government_Funded_R_.26_D_Center)
  * 4\.7 Working in Artificial
    Intelligence(#Working_in_Artificial_Intelligence)
  * 4\.8 On Understanding the Client and Developing
    Systems(#On_Understanding_the_Client_and_Developing_Systems)
  * 4\.9 Solving Y2K Problems(#Solving_Y2K_Problems)
  * 4\.10 How Computing Has Changed(#How_Computing_Has_Changed)
  * 4\.11 Advice for Women Considering
    Computing(#Advice_for_Women_Considering_Computing)
  * 4\.12 On Balancing Work and Family(#On_Balancing_Work_and_Family)
  * 4\.13 What Makes a Good Mentor(#What_Makes_a_Good_Mentor)
  * 4\.14 Teamwork and Team Bonding(#Teamwork_and_Team_Bonding)
  * 4\.15 On High-Order Languages(#On_High-Order_Languages)

![Powered by
MediaWiki(resources/assets/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)](//www.mediawiki.org/)
![Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki(extensions/SemanticMediaWiki/includes/../resources/images/smw_button.png)](https://www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 12 January 2015, at 13:06\.

* This page has been accessed 1,718 times.

* About ETHW(ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* Policies and disclaimers(ETHW:Policies "ETHW:Policies")

