Toggle navigation   

ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki(Main_Page)

* ** Go ****()
  * Browse by Subject(ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * Encyclopedia(Encyclopedia)
  
  * Oral Histories(Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * First Hand Histories(First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * LandmarksMilestones(Landmarks)
  
  * Archives(Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * Education(ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * Random page(Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * Help(Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * Contact us(Special:Contact)
  
  * 
  * Recent changes(Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * New pages(Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* ** Actions ****()
  * View
    source(index.php?title=Oral-History:Fran_Berman&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source e")
  
  * History(index.php?title=Oral-History:Fran_Berman&action=history "Past revisions of this page h")
  
  * 
  * Oral-History(Oral-History:Fran_Berman)
  
  * Discussion(index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Fran_Berman&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page t")
  
  * 
* ** Tools ****()
  * What links
    here(Special:WhatLinksHereOral-History:Fran_Berman "A list of all wiki pages that link here j")
  
  * Related
    changes(Special:RecentChangesLinkedOral-History:Fran_Berman "Recent changes in pages linked from this page k")
  
  * Special
    pages(Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages q")
  
  * Printable
    version(index.php?title=Oral-History:Fran_Berman&printable=yes "Printable version of this page p")
  
  * Permanent
    link(index.php?title=Oral-History:Fran_Berman&oldid=113020 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * Page
    information(index.php?title=Oral-History:Fran_Berman&action=info)
  
  * Browse properties(Special:BrowseOral-2DHistory:Fran_Berman)
* ** Account ****(# "Account")
  * Log
    in(index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3AFran+Berman)
  
  * 
  * Request account(Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Fran Berman

## About Fran Berman

Dr. Francine Berman was born in 1951 in Glendale, California. She
attended the University of California, Los Angeles for her undergraduate
degree, and later the University of Washington for her graduate and
postgraduate degrees in Mathematics. Berman’s Ph.D. thesis focused on
nonstandard models of propositional dynamic logic, and her work has been
primarily focused on theoretical computer science. She has worked as a
Computer Science Professor at the University of California, San Diego
and Director of the San Diego Supercomputer Center. Berman was also the
inaugural recipient of the IEEEACM-CS Ken Kennedy Award in 2009\.

In this interview, Fran Berman reflects on both her education and
career. Specifically, she considers how she came to be interested in
computer science, the results of her research, and how being a woman has
affected her experiences.

## About the Interview

FRAN BERMAN: An Interview Conducted by Janet Abbate, IEEE History
Center, 18 July 2002

Interview \# 577 for the IEEE History Center, The Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
Oral History Program, IEEE History Center at Stevens Institute of
Technology, Samuel C. Williams Library, 3rd Floor, Castle Point on
Hudson, Hoboken NJ 07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include
identification of the specific passages to be quoted, anticipated use of
the passages, and identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Fran Berman, an oral history conducted in 2002 by Janet Abbate, IEEE
History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

## Interview

INTERVIEW: Fran Berman\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: 18 July 2002\
PLACE: UC San Diego, San Diego, California

### Background and Education

**Abbate:**

I always start at the very beginning, so can you tell me when you were
born and where you grew up?

**Berman:**

I was born in 1951, in Glendale, California. I grew up in Los Angeles
and lived there until I went to college at UCLA. Then I moved to Seattle
for graduate school; I went to graduate school at the University of
Washington. My first job after that was in the Midwest at Purdue
University, so I moved to the Midwest.

**Abbate:**

I’m going to back up a little bit. You grew up in L.A. What did your
parents do for a living?

**Berman:**

My dad was a general contractor, and my mom was a homemaker.

**Abbate:**

Did you have any brothers or sisters?

**Berman:**

Yes, I had two brothers. I’m the oldest. My youngest brother ended up
being an entrepreneurial computer guy, so he’s been involved with a
couple of computer companies. My middle brother is an artist, and he
works on “The Simpsons”—the TV Show.

**Abbate:**

Had you been interested in math or science at an early age?

**Berman:**

Yes, I was always interested in math; so I came to computer science
through the math end of things. I was a math major in college and then
went to graduate school in math, and I actually got into theoretical
computer science in graduate school.

**Abbate:**

You got your B.A. in ‘73\.

**Berman:**

Yes: B.A. was in ‘73; M.A. was in ‘76; and my Ph.D., which was in math,
was in ‘79\.

**Abbate:**

Had you used a computer before college?

**Berman:**

No. I didn’t use a computer during college, either\!

**Abbate:**

When was the first time?

**Berman:**

In graduate school.

**Abbate:**

So until then you’d been doing more pure math? What area of math?

**Berman:**

You know, the general mathematics curriculum: topology, and real
analysis, and algebra, and that kind of stuff.

**Abbate:**

What did you think you were going to do with that?

**Berman:**

I thought I was going to be a math major. The reason why I got into
computer science is that, as I looked around for a thesis topic in
graduate school, I got very interested in programming logics, which was
an area at the interface of mathematics and computer science and
philosophy. I ended up working with people in the Computer Science
Department and doing a theoretical computer science thesis. So I was in
the Math Department, but my real technical advisors were computer
scientists, and I really ended up with a degree essentially in computer
science, even though formally it was in mathematics.

**Abbate:**

And you went straight from college to grad school?

**Berman:**

I did.

**Abbate:**

So you knew you were going to go on in the academics. That wasn’t a
question.

**Berman:**

After college, yes. I knew I was going to go to graduate school. I had
no idea what I was going to do after that.

**Abbate:**

Had your parents encouraged you to have a career? Or to go into math or
science?

**Berman:**

They didn’t discourage me. I don’t know that they particularly
encouraged me to go in this particular direction, but they didn’t
discourage me.

**Abbate:**

Did you think you would be a professor?

**Berman:**

You know, I don’t know if I really knew what I was going to be. I knew I
was going to go to graduate school. By the time I got out of college I
thought I would go for my Ph.D.; I wasn’t quite sure, really, what I
would do beyond that. And during graduate school I had a lot of
questions about what I wanted. I thought maybe I wanted to go to a
teaching school, and then I got a taste of doing research and going to
conferences and set my sights a little bit higher at the end of graduate
school. I got a job at a research place—I got a job at Purdue
University—and so then I got on the research track.

**Abbate:**

Were there a lot of women doing computing at U.W.?

**Berman:**

There were some. There weren’t very many. We had an informal group in
Math—I knew some women in Computer Science, but mostly I lived in
Mathematics; I was a T.A. there, and that was my peer group for the
first few years. The women in Mathematics: there were maybe a dozen of
us, and we used to have pot lucks every quarter. We got to know each
other well, and what actually got a lot of us through was just knowing
each other and that kind of informal bonding. There were a few people on
the faculty who were pretty supportive, but for the most part, it was
kind of benign neglect. There was one woman on the faculty, and she
didn’t really care; and then, towards the end of my time there, a
younger woman came on the faculty, and I’m not sure how much she cared,
but she cared more than the woman who was there. But there was a guy, a
Professor Emeritus, Bill Birnbaum. He was Emeritus then, so I’m sure
he’s been gone for many years; but he was really supportive of a bunch
of us, in our early years. He sort of took us under his wing, and it
really helped.

### Using a Computer for the First Time

**Abbate:**

So you actually used a computer for the first time in grad school?

**Berman:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

What was that like? What were you doing?

**Berman:**

I decided that I needed to take programming, so I took a programming
class and did what you do when you take programming classes: you stay up
all night and try to figure things out\!

**Abbate:**

And this is the late ‘70’s, I guess?

**Berman:**

Yes: mid-to-late seventies .

**Abbate:**

So what would that be in terms of technology? Minicomputers?

**Berman:**

No, I think we had cards or something\! I don’t know\! \laughs.\ I’m
not sure. I’m trying to remember the language we used. I think it was
PASCAL, or something like that, and I remember having some programming
projects. I didn’t take a lot of programming classes in grad school, but
I took some, and I took a computer architecture course and a lot of
theory courses. I did this from the Math Department, so I was out there
on my own, not with this group in Computer Science. Later on I actually
bonded more to the people in the Computer Science Department, but I
really made that transition late during graduate school. It was kind of
a difficult time to make that transition.

**Abbate:**

Did you take to computers right away?

**Berman:**

Well, yes; I liked computers a lot. I think that often people come to
computer science from two different ends of things: either the math end
of things, where you have appreciation for the aesthetics—and
theoretical computer science is a really great venue for that—and then
people also come from the engineering side of things, where they’re
hands-on and want to see how things are made and built and constructed.
I came more from the math side of things, so for me it was the
aesthetics of it that really appealed to me.

**Abbate:**

What was your dissertation on?

**Berman:**

Nonstandard models of propositional dynamic logic. So it was programming
logic, and I basically did these mathematical models of it. It was a
very theoretical thesis.

**Abbate:**

So that’s almost getting to the philosophy end, or at least the logic
parts.

**Berman:**

Yes. It was really a mix between philosophy and math and computer
science. But it was in a really hot area at that point in time:
programming logics and propositional dynamic logics were pretty hot
areas, so there was a lot of interest in theoretical computer science in
these particular areas.

### On Purdue University and UCSD

**Abbate:**

Did you have a lot of offers when you got out?

**Berman:**

I was lucky. I interviewed at maybe a half a dozen places, and I got
offers pretty much everywhere I interviewed. I decided to go to Purdue
University. I never would have expected that I would end up there, but I
got there and it was a great place. It was a very solid department, and
it was a good area for theory; they had some very well-known people
there. And I had an adventurous spirit, so I thought I would go. I had
grown up in Southern California and stayed on the West Coast my whole
life.

**Abbate:**

So Indiana was something new.

**Berman:**

Yes, I thought it would be fun. And it was\!

**Abbate:**

Were you there until you came to UCSD?

**Berman:**

I was there for six years. During the time I was there, I met my
husband, who was a grad student in biochemistry, and we got married. I’m
three years older than my husband, and when he graduated we were looking
for a place where I could continue doing what I was doing and he could
get a good postdoc. So we looked at everything that was good for him and
everything that was good for me, and we looked at all the places in the
intersection, and we just interviewed around and ended up here \at UC
San Diego\. This was both of our second choice. My first choice would
have been to stay at Purdue, because I liked it a lot, and his first
choice would have been to go up to Stanford and take a postdoc up there;
so we ended up here.

**Abbate:**

But you’ve been here eighteen years or something?

**Berman:**

Yes, I’ve been here a long time.

**Abbate:**

So it couldn’t have been too bad\!

**Berman:**

No, it’s been great\! I’m quite happy we ended up here.

**Abbate:**

Were you in Computer Science and Engineering when you came in ‘84?

**Berman:**

Yes. I came to Computer Science.

**Abbate:**

How developed was that department?

**Berman:**

It was a little department then. The computer scientists were a division
in EECS, and shortly after I came, we actually became a department on
our own. But when I first came here, it was between eight and twelve
faculty in this little program, and now we’re almost forty faculty in
the Computer Science Department; so it’s grown quite a lot in the
intervening years.

### Being a Woman at UCSD

**Abbate:**

Were you the first woman there, or did they have others in computer
science?

**Berman:**

No, I was not the first woman in the department. The woman before me had
kind of self-destructed and became an Amway sales person\! \laughs.\
It’s true\! And so there was a lot of \skepticism\. I think women are
often asked to represent their whole gender: so one woman flaked out on
them, and they thought, “Okay, are women \in general\ going to flake
out on me?” So I was the person that was \supposed\ to prove to them
that women were not going to flake out on them. Now, guys had flaked out
in the department, too; but no one had expected that it would be a
problem with another man.

**Abbate:**

“Everyone knows men can do it\!” \laughs.\

**Berman:**

Yes\! \laughs.\ Actually, people were very welcoming, and they were
quite good. I was the first woman in the Division of Engineering to have
a baby while I was on the job, and people were very supportive. I would
say that for the most part—not every single minute of every single day,
and not every single person—but for the most part, people were very
supportive of me.

### On Balancing Work and Family

**Abbate:**

Was it difficult balancing work and family?

**Berman:**

It is always difficult balancing work and family. It never gets easy. I
think if you’re a serious parent and serious career person, that’s a lot
for one life\! I think it is always difficult.

**Abbate:**

Was the university helpful about that? I don’t know how many people were
trying to do this on the faculty.

**Berman:**

The university was good about that, but my experience was that it really
depended on how I approached them. So when I found out I was pregnant—I
was quite happy to be pregnant, and it was planned—I approached my
Department Head and I said, “There’s really good news: we’re going to
have a baby. Here’s my plan.” And I had planned it out so I was going to
be free the quarter I had the baby and teach one two-hour seminar the
quarter after that; and I made sure that all my responsibilities were
not on anybody else’s shoulders, that they all got worked out. So it
wasn’t a problem for anybody, because I made sure that they were not
doing my work: that they could be really happy for me, because my work
was getting done elsewhere. So people were really supportive. And I
treated it like it was one of life’s natural things—because it is one of
life’s natural things, and we shouldn’t act like it’s some bizarre thing
that happens to people\! So that’s pretty much how I approached it, and
everybody else went along with that, and it was really fine. That was
for the first baby. With the second baby, I actually found out—which I
didn’t know with the first baby—that the university has a modified
duties policy: you’re still active, but you have a lot of flexibility in
what you do. So for my second child, who was born two and a half years
after my first child, I arranged with my next Department Head that I
wouldn’t teach the quarter my son was born, and then I took off a
sabbatical quarter after that, and then I taught the Spring quarter; so
that gave me a good time with him. And again, I saw my graduate
students—sometimes I’d bring the baby in and sometimes I wouldn’t—so
my jobs got done without anybody else having an extra burden. So there
was no reason for anyone have a problem with it, and so people went
along with it just fine.

**Abbate:**

But it was up to you to make those arrangements, so that all the work
was going to get done somehow?

**Berman:**

You know, it never occurred to me that it should be somebody else’s
responsibility. I figure when you’re a Professor, it’s a very autonomous
position. Your prominence as a researcher, your research career: I mean,
you’re driving, your colleagues aren’t driving; so you can manage it in
your own way. That happened later on: I had breast cancer as well, and
there was a time when I went through a year of chemotherapy and
radiation and stuff like that; and again, it was me driving, and I
figured out what I needed to do—because that’s not something, even in
the most liberal and progressive of atmospheres, that someone else can
figure out. Again, I was pretty straightforward with my colleagues. I
said, “This is what’s happening in my life, and I could use all the
support I can get, but I’m not going to make you do my work.” And people
were really great about it. I’ve had a lot of support for those kinds of
things.

**Abbate:**

It’s good that it was the kind of environment where you were able to
have that flexibility.

**Berman:**

Well, it wasn’t just then; it was all throughout my life. I mean, my
husband was an academic, too, so we’ve always shared stuff down the
middle. We shared babies, we shared illnesses, we shared everything. So
I feel like part of what made having kids work, in addition to the
flexibility of being a professor, is that I have a husband with a
flexible job who thought of it as part of his responsibilities as
well—and that made a huge difference\! There were a lot of times when
my husband spent a lot more time taking my daughter to ballet and
picking up kids. We would change who took the morning and who took the
afternoon. He did at least as much as I did.

**Abbate:**

What do your kids do now?

**Berman:**

They’re teenagers now, so they spend time actively being teenagers\! My
son’s just about to start high school, and my daughter will be a junior
in high school next year.

**Abbate:**

So we don’t know yet.

**Berman:**

We don’t know what they’re going to do yet.

**Abbate:**

Do you think they might go into computing?

**Berman:**

Well, my son’s sort of interested in science and computing. My
daughter’s a dancer, and she’s really interested in being a
choreographer. Modern dance, ballet, fine arts, stuff like that:
performing arts.

### On Parallel and Grid Computing

**Abbate:**

Now, you founded a laboratory for parallel computing . . .

**Berman:**

I founded two laboratories.

**Abbate:**

Were those two separate labs? Parallel computing and something else?

**Berman:**

Grid computing.

**Abbate:**

Okay, I wasn’t sure.

**Berman:**

Parallel computing was my researcher area of interest when I first came
here. I founded a laboratory, and I had a lot of students, and then
other faculty came and we shared it together. Then, when I branched out
in the ‘90s into grid computing, there started being enough
concentration of activity that we founded a Grid Computing Laboratory.
Part of the reason to start a laboratory in a university venue is
resources: so you can get the space that’s appropriate, and give the
activity a name and a focus, and stuff like that. The Parallel Computing
Laboratory actually still goes on today, and there’s other faculty
associated with it who are now more in that area. Now I’m more
associated the Grid Computing Laboratory, because that’s the area that
I’m working in now.

**Abbate:**

Okay, so the Parallel Computing Lab: Were you actually building
hardware, or was that more software?

**Berman:**

Software.

**Abbate:**

And was that for a number of machines in parallel, or were you using
parallel hardware like a Connection Machine or something? What was the
approach there?

**Berman:**

My focus in parallel computing was to look at mapping and scheduling
issues for parallel computers, in particular distributed memory parallel
computers. In the early days, we were writing some software that helped
do automatic mapping and load balancing and do that in a
performance-efficient way. Then, using that as a theme, I moved into
Grid Computing, where you’re trying to do mapping and scheduling of a
distributed set of heterogeneous resources. So we wrote software for
that venue, and we worked with application scientists as well.

**Abbate:**

What is the definition of grid computing?

**Berman:**

A grid is composed of a number of resources networked together, and grid
computing allows you to use them individually or as an ensemble. Using
them as an ensemble means you can actually use those computers together
as a big virtual parallel computer; grid computing addresses how one
might do this kind of distributed parallel computing. Grid computing is
also an umbrella for ways to access resources of any kind: remote
instruments, data archives, computers, et cetera,. You think of the
resources as a big group, and you want to use whatever subset of the
group is relevant to your problem.

**Abbate:**

Is that analogous to a power grid, where you have different generators,
and you can connect them?

**Berman:**

Absolutely\! It is analogous to a power grid. The difference is that, if
you think about the power grid: there are generators, there are
transformers, and you can plug in your laptop, or your hair dryer, or
your toaster in any socket and you get power. You don’t think about
which transformers are being used, and sometimes you don’t think about
who pays for it; you just think, “Here’s power.” That’s roughly what
you’d like to do with the computational grid: “Here’s computing”. But
the difference between the power grid and a computational grid is: you
might get different performance depending on which resources in the grid
you use. It’s not like you’re going to plug your toaster in and you’re
going to make better toast depending on which transformer you’re going
to use \laughs\, but in some sense, if you’re going to plug your
program into the computational grid, you’re going to get better
performance on some machines than others, depending on how busy they
are, how fast they are, which libraries are there, where the data
resides; et cetera.

**Abbate:**

So it’s heterogeneous, and I guess it’s also . . .

**Berman:**

Dynamic.

**Abbate:**

Yes. I was going to say “context-dependent,” but I guess more dynamic.
Now, that’s so fascinating, because my first book was a history of the
Internet, and at the very beginning of the ARPANET, they had this vision
of distributed computation that didn’t actually work at all in the early
seventies, because the obstacles were just too big.

**Berman:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

I mean, it turned into basically being an email thing. And it’s just so
interesting that now that the technology is more mature, that’s more of
a reality than it was going to be thirty years ago.

**Berman:**

If you think about it, this is an amazing \time\. It’s funny: I’ve
just been preparing a talk that I have to give next week, sort of a
“State of the Grid” talk, to the Global Grid Forum in Scotland; and
one of the things I was thinking about in preparing my talk is that
there are extremely sophisticated applications out there that do not, in
fact, use grid services at this point. Walmart inventory control: every
time you go to Walmart and you buy something at Walmart, there’s a
little bar code on that object, and it gets scanned in and gets beamed
through their satellite network to a centralized data repository that
does real-time inventory control. If they’re running out of red
Christmas trees, the order is in. They’re predicting the number of red
Christmas trees versus the number of green or blue Christmas trees
instantaneously, to make sure that they don’t run out. This is an
extremely sophisticated inventory control system that’s distributed;
it’s dynamic; it’s coordinated; and people use it all the time. My son
plays Everquest, the multi-role-player game. They’re doing distributed
data management; communication; their avatars are interacting with each
other in real time. There are some very sophisticated distributed
applications out there. The grid should make it easier to build
applications like these, and I think one of the interesting things
that’ll happen is that we’ll see the commercial world and the grid
world come together to create the new generation of applications. So all
these things, starting with the Internet—where your browser, of course,
is another sophisticated application, but there’s more that you can do
with the Internet than just have browsers. So I think things are really
happening.

### Working as Head of the NPACI and SDSC

**Abbate:**

The National Partnership for Advanced Computational Infrastructure: what
is that, exactly, and when did that happen?

**Berman:**

About five years ago, NSF—I mean, it all started a little bit earlier
than that, obviously—but NSF observed, quite correctly, that
computational infrastructure has become really a first-class tool for
disciplinary science. If you think about the Grand Challenge
collaborations of the eighties, and some of the gigabit testbed
applications of the early nineties, and the rise of grid computing, and
all of that: all of that points to the fact that some of the most
stunning results in disciplinary science came from the use of data
management, computational devices, networking to remote instruments: all
kinds of things. So the NSF wanted to look at really building wide-scale
infrastructure for the scientific community, in order to catalyze more
of those kinds of results—results that lie at the interface of science
and technology. They developed the idea of Partnerships for Advanced
Computational Infrastructure to bring a lot of people in to interact
around building infrastructure: to get applications people in,
computational scientists in, computer scientists in, technologists in;
to have large-scale resources of big machines, but also to have this
notion of the right kinds of infrastructures: portals, and tools, and
libraries, et cetera. So the idea behind the PACI Program—Partnerships
for Advanced Computational Infrastructure—is to build these large-scale
partnerships. They had a competition. At that time there were four
supercomputer centers, and each of the supercomputer centers submitted a
partnership proposal, and NSF chose two. SDSC \San Diego Supercomputer
Center\ is leading-edge site for one of them, called NPACI: National
Partnership for Advanced Computational Infrastructure; and NCSA
\National Center for Supercomputer Applications\ in Illinois is the
leading-edge site for the Alliance, which is the other Partnership for
Advanced Computational Infrastructure. The Alliance and NPACI both get
large-scale funding, and we’ve both been getting this for about five
years now—it was initially visualized as a ten-year program. I think
other things may happen in the next five years as a result of current
evaluation that NSF is doing about what it wants to do about large-scale
infrastructure in the next few years; but these two partnerships get a
lot of funding, have a lot of partners, and lead a lot of activities
around building computational infrastructure. In the meantime,
Pittsburgh, which was a former one of the four supercomputer centers,
won the first terascale facility proposal that NSF put on; so they also
have now what’s called PACI resources, but they don’t have a PACI
partnership.

**Abbate:**

You’re head of the supercomputer center . . .

**Berman:**

I’m head of NPACI and SDSC.

**Abbate:**

So they’re two separate things.

**Berman:**

They’re separate, but highly related.

**Abbate:**

So SDSC is the physical computers?

**Berman:**

The San Diego Supercomputer Center, which is the building we are in
right now, is an organized research unit on the UCSD campus. We’re a
large-scale facility. We’re leading-edge site for the National
Partnership for Advanced Computational Infrastructure. There’s a
large-scale cooperative agreement, so we’re kind of the point of the
spear for NPACI. There are actually other things that go on at SDSC
other than NPACI, and there are other partners in NPACI other than SDSC.

**Abbate:**

Right. But NPACI doesn’t own physical infrastructure?

**Berman:**

NPACI builds software and has large-scale computing resources: there are
computational resources at SDSC, at Texas, at Michigan, at Cal Tech;
there are some resources at Berkeley; it’s varied a bit over the five
years. So we have hardware resources; we also build software
infrastructure; and we have projects that help propel the next
generation of application results as well. So there’s a mix.

**Abbate:**

Okay, I think I see.

**Berman:**

And educational programs as well. So there are educational programs
associated with NPACI—and the Alliance as well.

**Abbate:**

You must be collaborating with scientists from all of these other
schools, and other disciplines.

**Berman:**

Absolutely\!

**Abbate:**

So they could be in biology or something.

**Berman:**

Yes. A lot of biologists, actually.

**Abbate:**

That sounds incredibly stimulating\!

**Berman:**

It’s a great job\! It’s the world’s greatest job\!

**Abbate:**

What is that like?

**Berman:**

It’s wonderful. I firmly believe that the whole purpose of all of this
computational infrastructure and all of these resources is to make
science go to some place you couldn’t get to before. This is like
working at Toys R Us for scientists\! Every day I come in and we make
galaxies collide; we look at inner space through understanding the
passage of information from inside to outside of molecules; there are
just so many things we do here at the Center. We help the National
Archives with our database technologies; we’re archiving electronic
files from the government. If you think about presidential libraries:
your presidential library of today could fit on a few CDs as a bunch of
electronic files. What do you do with that if you want to understand all
that information fifty years from now? What kind of mechanism are you
going to use for communication fifty years from now? What’s going to
happen to your tapes? Now, you’re going to transcribe this \interview\
into stuff that we can keep on electronic media, but say you wanted to
keep it on tape: what would you do? All of those are issues that people
look at, and SDSC is large enough scale and is synergistic enough to
look at these high-end problems and really crack them. It’s a really
exciting place to be\!

**Abbate:**

How did you get to be the head of this? Did that grow naturally out of
your work in parallel and grid computing?

**Berman:**

A combination of things. My predecessor is Sid Karin, who is a professor
on this campus. He was at the Center for fifteen or sixteen years, and
it’s a pretty stressful, demanding job. When Sid started the center,
essentially it was forty people, and it’s grown to four hundred people;
the budgets have grown, the expectations have grown, the world that the
Center has lived in has grown, and it’s a very stressful, demanding job.
When Sid decided to step down and the campus had to decide, “What are we
going to do about Director of SDSC?” they looked inward. They thought
about doing an outward search as well. I was approached about what my
interest might be about being Director of the Center, and it was a good
time, in terms of my life and my career, to consider doing something
like this—which is a real departure from being a professor and running a
large-scale lab, but I’ve loved the Center forever, and I’ve been
interacting with the Center since before there was a building. It’s
really tempting if somebody comes to you and says, “Here’s a huge
entity. Can you take it into the future?” It was a very interesting
opportunity for me, and I decided to do it.

**Abbate:**

Do you have a vision for it?

**Berman:**

Absolutely\! \laughs.\ That’s my job. For the last couple of decades
SDSC was primarily about the Big Machines, what kinds of software do we
need to build for the big machine, how do we make users able to use the
big machine profitably. We’re in the Internet age today: everything is
about distribution and coordination; big machines are important
components of the mix, but it’s much more coordinated and dynamic. It is
incumbent on me to take the Supercomputer Center into the Internet Age
from the Supercomputer Age. \Drawing on\ my background with grid
computing, and my work with applications scientists, and my own national
and international contacts, we’re focusing on things that will take us
into modern cyber-infrastructure. It’s a different thing, but it’s the
kind of thing that happens when organizations evolve, and you have to
evolve towards the future.

**Abbate:**

What skills does it take to run a center like this, that are different
from being a research professor?

**Berman:**

My job is really focused on strategic thinking. It’s very important to
be looking ahead. What should the Center be doing? What’s the right
thing? You need political skills, because it’s a highly political job.
You need a good sense of humor—because a lot of weird stuff happens\!
\laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Do you have an example of those things?

**Berman:**

None I’d like to put on tape\! \both laugh.\ These jobs are very
demanding and highly political, and I think at the uppermost level of
organizations, things happen because of a mix of people’s vision, of
people’s energy, of political environments; of what you promise and what
you deliver, and how you can balance all of the competing things to
think about. So I think this job requires someone who’s a real leader,
who can balance all of those different things. It’s an immensely
stimulating job and a really demanding job.

**Abbate:**

Did those skills come naturally to you? Did you have to work at them?
Did you have some mentors helping you?

**Berman:**

I think, like all good jobs, you grow on the job. I think that there are
things that I brought to the job: I think I’m a good leader; I think I’m
pretty independent; I think I have good political skills and I’m a
fairly sensitive person. You know, I had no idea how difficult this job
would be\! \laughs.\ I had no idea how political this level of
organizational structure would be. And a lot of stuff you just learn by
doing. You make a lot of mistakes; you hope that none of them are fatal;
and you just keep doing the best you can. I’m still learning on the job.
I’ve been on the job about a year and a half now. I think of the first
year as: I was in the deep end, and I was breathing\! \laughs.\ Now
I’m in the deep end and I’m swimming, and I hope to swim even better
next year. I mean, these are just enormously difficult jobs. You just do
the best you can.

### On Commercializing Research

**Abbate:**

Do you have to go to Congress every year and convince them to fund you?

**Berman:**

Not directly but we talk to a lot of people in leadership and in
Government. You have to talk to Congressional folks; you have to talk to
government agencies; you have to talk to CEOs; you have to talk to
university Presidents, Governors, all kinds of people.

**Abbate:**

You mentioned CEOs: this is also a business-academic partnership? Where
do they come in?

**Berman:**

There are opportunities for strategic collaboration with large-scale
centers, and so you have to figure out what your industrial partnerships
are going to be with various and sundry companies—people for whom it
makes sense.

**Abbate:**

Have some of your ideas been spun off into products, or worked their way
into commercial software?

**Berman:**

The Center has a number of projects that have ended up going out in the
commercial sphere in some way, shape, or form: either through a company,
or through a product, or through an individual tech transfer. The
University has pretty stringent rules about what’s okay and what’s not
okay, and there’s a large office on campus, a large-scale infrastructure
there, that helps us figure out what makes sense and what doesn’t. But
we’re funny, because we’re hybrid: we’re halfway between academia and
industry, and so rules of one place don’t necessarily apply to another.

**Abbate:**

I was thinking about your own previous research. It sounded very
practical; it sounded like someone could really use it. I wondered if
you, or even someone else, had commercialized it.

**Berman:**

In my own research, I’ve never spun off into commercial venues.

**Abbate:**

I was just wondering if you ever, for example, discovered some software
and said, “Hey, I know where that idea came from.”

**Berman:**

Well there is \that possibility\, but I think people make choices in
life. I think I have done things as a researcher that were commercially
viable, but you can only have so many full-time jobs in your life, and
between being a full-time academic and a full-time parent . . . Starting
a company would be another full-time job, so I think being a parent and
an academic were enough\! \laughs.\ Although other people do it.

**Abbate:**

I didn’t even mean you, necessarily. I’ve talked to a couple of other
people who said that someone else had—and they were just thrilled that
someone was using their stuff, and I’m just curious if that ever
happened to you.

**Berman:**

Yes. It’s exciting. Our stuff was always out there at the bleeding edge,
so it would have taken a lot of work— reasonable work, but a lot of
work—to get it into the more robust commercial sphere.

**Abbate:**

So maybe it would be a couple of generations later?

**Berman:**

Yes. I mean, research computer scientists often work with domain
scientists who are willing to put up with out-there technology. Things
often break when you’re doing some really interesting stuff—but in the
commercial arena, you really don’t want things breaking. You want things
to be very robust, and that last mile in developing usable, robust
software—the documentation, the making sure that everything that can go
wrong is not going to go wrong—there’s a lot of work that goes into
that. That’s really a lot of what companies do: there are some very cool
ideas where things start, but there’s a huge amount of work that goes
into making software ready for prime time.

**Abbate:**

Do you think there might be two different personalities: people who want
to do the cutting-edge research and people who want to actually turn it
into something?

**Berman:**

Not necessarily, because I know a lot of people who have gone from the
academic environment to start companies. It’s really exciting—very
entrepreneurial, very high-risk—and some people succeed and some people
don’t. There’s also a timing issue: there are times in your life when I
think you’re ready for the next big challenge, and maybe that’s a good
time for people to move to another university, or become an
administrator, or start a company. So I think there are lots of things
that come into play on individual decisions to do that.

### The Treatment of Women in Computer Science

**Abbate:**

Now, you’ve obviously been very successful in your career. Did you ever
feel that being a woman was any obstacle in terms of not getting equal
pay or promotion or attention, or overt discrimination? Was it ever
problematic for you?

**Berman:**

I’ll give you two answers. The first is that I think that it’s been all
kinds of things: there were times when being a woman was a real
impediment; there were times when being a woman got me a lot of
attention that I might not have gotten otherwise; and there was a lot of
time when being a woman was a real no-op : you know, nothing happened
for or against. And so if you put it all together, it kind of all washes
out.

**Abbate:**

It averages out.

**Berman:**

Yes. So for the most part, it hasn’t held me back from the things that I
have wanted to do. For the most part\! \laughs.\ I’m the first woman
Supercomputer Center Director ever for the NSF, and I have a different
leadership style than my colleagues, and I think that people expect that
they’re going to deal with the Director of the supercomputer in a
particular way, and they expect you’re going to act a certain way, and
they expect you’re going to lead a certain way. If people know you’re a
reasonably nice person, a team player, they don’t think you’re going to
make hard decisions; they don’t think you’re necessarily going to have
vision; they don’t think you’re necessarily credible. One of the things
that I’ve talked about with some of my colleagues is that a lot of
times, being a professor, it’s like people assume there’s some different
job for you—the girl job. \They think\ that you don’t have to publish
as much as anyone else, and your ideas don’t have to be as good as
anyone else’s; somehow there are different rules that apply to you,
because you’re nice, or something like that. And in this job, I think
that’s a bit true, too. Because you’re not what people expect a Director
to look like or be like or whatever, they don’t know how to deal with
that. So, like any position, there’s this credibility-establishing
phase—which lasts from two picoseconds to days or hours or months,
depending on your audience\! But once people are over the hump, they’re
pretty much going to treat you just like anyone else. And this is a very
high-stakes position, and so no one is going to do stuff for you just
because they like you, or just because you’re nice, or just because you
deserve it. Typically there’s a lot of risk; there are a lot of
resources; very high stakes; and you have to perform just like anyone
else. One thing that I think is really true is that what drives me is
not necessarily the same as what drives my colleagues. We get in
competitive environments all the time, and it’s my job as Director of
the Center to make sure that SDSC is doing the right thing and being
successful in these competitive environments. Sometimes I think my
colleagues go out there, and their mental image is: “Kill the enemy\!”
\laughs.\

**Abbate:**

The “enemy” being the other supercomputer centers?

**Berman:**

Well, just whomever you’re competing against in these large-scale
venues. And I always go out there and I think, “I must protect my
cubs\!” \both laugh.\ You know, you have to motivate yourself
somehow, and I think, “I can’t go back to the Center not having done
this for us\!” So I do think I take maybe a different approach than my
colleagues, but we still have to fight it out in the same venues, and
there are still the same rewards. So I do think it’s a little bit
different.

**Abbate:**

Do you think computing in general has gotten more open to women since
you started, or less?

**Berman:**

I’d like to think that; but it seems like we went through a bump in the
eighties where there was a lot more diversity, and a lot more women
colleagues; and it seems like now it’s closed up again, and I don’t know
why.

**Abbate:**

Do you have any speculations on that?

**Berman:**

I don’t know. I watch my own kids, and I watch how they use technology,
and my son and his friends: they get together and they kill things
together—you know, Klingons etc.; and that’s fun for them. And my
daughter never does this stuff. Sometimes my daughter does Neopets
online. A lot of girls \do\. It’s been an interesting thing. We’ve had
girls come through the Center, and they’re doing these Neopets. I don’t
know fully what happens, but they’re like . . .

**Abbate:**

It’s some kind of virtual pet?

**Berman:**

Something you take care of, and you can have them play games with each
other, and you feed them. My daughter does instant messaging, so she
uses the computer for communication. She’s comfortable with it, but
she’s not using it quite in the way that my son does. He’s managing
his little warrior-weapon database, and he’s talking to his friend; his
avatar is shooting somebody else’s avatar. The only thing I can think of
is, there’s not as easy a venue for girls to get interested in
technology, perhaps; but that’s just a seat-of-the-pants comment. I
really don’t know.

### Why Computer Science Is Interesting

**Abbate:**

Do you think it’s gotten more competitive to get into computer science?

**Berman:**

Possibly; I’m not sure. You know, I think you get kids interested by
making things fun for them. So if you’re interested in math and science,
there’s the “geek factor”: as kids go through junior high and high
school, and they’re interested in looking cool to their peer group, so
the geek factor is much harder on girls than it is on boys. You really
have to like it to be in it, because otherwise the geek factor will
maybe push you out. And I think that also, computers are not so
user-friendly—stereotypically—to girls as they are to guys. Now, the
Internet’s maybe changing things a bit. Everybody uses the Internet:
young and old, and girls and boys, in all kinds of ways; but I’m not
sure.

**Abbate:**

What have you found most satisfying about working with computers?

**Berman:**

Well, I’m not a big programmer. That’s not what interests me about
computers, the big programming task. I use computers as a tool. So when
I want to know what movies are close to my house, I use the computer;
and when I want to give a snazzy presentation, I use the computer; and
when I want to communicate with people, I use the computer; and writing
on the computer is much more fun than writing with pencil and paper. But
I don’t spend a lot of time programming, and I’m not interested in being
a sys admin. I’m not so inclined to use it as an end to itself. I’m not
interested in tools as an end to themselves; I’m using it as a venue to
accomplish something.

**Abbate:**

I guess I meant in a broader sense, not necessarily programming. I mean,
your work, on the theoretical or on the software level, is certainly
about computing, or at least some of it is. So what interests you on
that level, or what’s interesting about doing work that’s involved with
computers on that level?

**Berman:**

In terms of my own research?

**Abbate:**

Yes. I assume there’s something appealing for you about not doing just
completely abstract math, but applying it using the computer.

**Berman:**

Oh, okay: I just love where computers can take us. I mean, the fact that
we can simulate the workings of the body, or how the universe began: I
think that’s a tremendously wonderful thing. I think the fact that we
can pull together all of this information and really understand; just
from random time series from the sensors on the bridge, figure out when
to get off the bridge because there’s too many stresses and strains and
it’s dangerous for people. The fact that computational and data
management infrastructure provides a way to get to big societal
problems: for me, it’s just incredibly compelling. \The computer\ is a
really important tool for these societal problems. You think about
integration of all the database of information that allows you to
identify a terrorist, or figure out the solution to any hard problem: I
think that’s a really exciting use for computers.

### On Bill Birnbaum and Mentorship

**Abbate:**

You had mentioned a professor—I guess it was Bill Birnbaum—who had been
a sort of mentor to you. Did you have other mentors along the way?

**Berman:**

Oh, absolutely\! I’ve had a load of people who were really helpful in my
career. I’m a pretty independent person, and there’s just been a number
of people all the way through that I have talked to. When I was at
Purdue, I spent a lot of time talking to Larry Snyder; he was a
professor there. He was a really wonderful mentor. Here at UCSD, Sid
Karin, my predecessor, has been one of my mentors; also Jeanne Ferrante
and Larry Carter, two folks in the department. There are also Professors
who have just been wonderful people to talk to. Some of the women I know
in the community: Maria Klawe, and Nancy Levison, and Jan Cuny. A lot of
people have really been just wonderful mentors. Rick Stevens, at Argonne
National Lab, is a great colleague, and I talk to him about a lot of
stuff.

**Abbate:**

Do you try to mentor other women?

**Berman:**

Absolutely. I think it’s pretty important that we pay attention.

**Abbate:**

I was noticing: I picked up this little recruiting brochure, and it’s
all women, at least on the first couple of pages. \Shows recruiting
brochure for the San Diego Supercomputer Center, titled “IT
Professionals: The Best Minds in the Best Environment.”\

**Berman:**

What is this? \Looking at brochure.\

**Abbate:**

I don’t know if you had anything to do with this. It has all these
pictures of women on the cover, and I wondered if that was deliberate.

**Berman:**

I’m sure it was\! \laughs.\ Yes: it says, “Career opportunities,” so I
think the message here is that it’s really open to everybody at SDSC—and
it really is. So I guess that’s the message here. Your External
Relations Department always tries to figure out how to make that message
in the best possible way.

**Abbate:**

Well, it caught my eye\!

**Berman:**

Yes. That was good.

**Abbate:**

Do you find that women end up in certain sub-specialties of computing?

**Berman:**

Well, it would be interesting \to know\. I’ve always thought that
there’s rich material for someone from the social sciences, to look at
where women fall within computer science. Arguably, women are attracted
to computer science—they’ve all gone through the geek challenge and all
these kinds of things to get there; but I think the interesting thing
is—and I just have anecdotal information here; I don’t know if this is
true or not—but my sense is that more women follow the mathematical side
of things than the engineering side of things. You typically see more
women in theory and fewer women in computer architecture, for example. I
think it would be interesting to look at that, and I think there may be
some interesting answers there, but I don’t know what they are.

**Abbate:**

Yes, it’s an interesting question. Other than the obvious
hardwaresoftware thing, I don’t see an obvious pattern, and I don’t
know if anyone’s counted up the numbers of women in different
specialties. Maybe I’ll have to do it\! \laughs.\

**Berman:**

Yes. Maybe this is your \task\.

### How Computer Science Has Changed

**Abbate:**

I’m curious if there’s anything there. How do you see the field of
computing as having changed? I mean, obviously it’s changed a lot since
you started; but what really stands out for you?

**Berman:**

You know, I think it’s like life itself: it’s just gotten much more
complex, the environment. I think that in the fifties, sixties,
seventies, eighties, it was about one machine and algorithms for one
machine, even if it was an increasingly complicated machine. I think
with the eighties and the nineties, we started looking in a much more
multidisciplinary, multi-scale, multi-information way, and then you get
the complexity of coordination. How do you coordinate all of these
different resources? You lose control; you lose centralization of focus;
and I think that makes dealing with the potential of all of these
resources as an ensemble, as a computational infrastructure, much more
difficult. I think that computer science as a discipline is grappling
with, not just networks or data or computers, but how you pull all of
those together and make the tradeoffs you need to make. You want your
program to run as fast as possible: what are the tradeoffs you make
between transferring your data, and using the network, and how many
processors you use, and all those kinds of issues? So I think there’s
been just increasing complexity. One of the other things that has made
things more interesting is that computers have gone out of the realm of
academicians and a bigger focus for the private sector. Everybody uses
computers today. There are more IP addresses per person than there are
just about anything else. We all have cell phones, and PDAs, and
computers, and cars with computers—and we expect them to work together;
I expect my cell phone to show me my email. And as you start looking at
pulling together all these devices—and not just doing it for the
biologist or the physicist, but doing it for the average person, who
doesn’t necessarily know what the operating system in their cell phone
is—then you have to deal with usability. You have to deal with
coordination of these devices. You have to deal with the commercial
realm, where there are many vendors, and there are different rules and
different data and different formats; and that gets you into policy
issues, economic issues, security issues, multi-country issues: my cell
phone comes from Germany and my PDA comes from Japan. So there’s a lot
more things in the mix than there used to be. Technology becomes more
important, but I think it’s also harder to think about design from first
principles and make sure that the design is comprehensive and makes
sense. It all has to come together.

**Abbate:**

So it’s much more heterogeneous, in a way. It’s not just technology.

**Berman:**

It’s a fact of life: heterogeneity is a fact of life.

**Abbate:**

It’s very social and economic and political, right from the beginning.

**Berman:**

Right from the start, yes.

**Abbate:**

So when you said computing was like life, you mean . . .

**Berman:**

I mean life is heterogeneous. For any individual one of us as a person,
we have all these circles: we have our work friends; and we have other
parents we know through our kids; if your hobby is looking for UFOs or
whatever, you have your group of people that you hang out with doing
that; and your life becomes this mix of all these different circles
interacting in all these different ways, and you have to somehow
coordinate them on the individual level to make it work. It’s
challenging\!

### Advice for Young Women Entering Computer Science

**Abbate:**

Do you have any advice for young women who might be thinking about going
into computing today?

**Berman:**

I think it’s a great field, and I think there are some of the world’s
most compelling problems, and I think it would be great to have more
women in this field. I guess my advice is just, “Hang in there and stay
the course.” Don’t get discouraged; don’t let discouragements knock you
out of there; and just do it the way you think you ought to do it. Learn
how to play the game; learn when you don’t have to play the game. Have
some confidence in yourself, and just do it\!

**Abbate:**

I was struck about what you just said about “Learn when you don’t have
to play the game.” Can you elaborate on that?

**Berman:**

I think every professional figures out that there’s this trade-off
between establishing your credibility and playing by the rules, and
doing things in the way that benefits you and helps you accomplish your
goals; and I think everybody figures out how to do that in their own
way. Here’s a good example: often for early career folks to be taken
seriously as an academic—whether you’re female or male— your colleagues
want to think you’re always working, that you’re not spending a lot of
your time reading books, going to movies, and picking your kids up from
ballet lessons; they want to think you’re writing papers every single
minute. It just seems to be the nature of establishing credibility
within academic culture, and people have strategies for handling these
expectations. Some people say up front, “I’m picking up my kids from
ballet,” or “I’m going to the movies,” or whatever; but some people say,
“I’m going to an off-campus meeting,” and that’s what they do.

**Abbate:**

And they’re meeting their daughter at the ballet lesson.

**Berman:**

And they’re meeting their daughter at the ballet lesson\! I think that
everybody kind of decides for themselves; but if you’re in your
credibility-establishing stage, and you want your colleagues to think
you’re credible, and if you choose to handle it that way, then you’re
doing it your way and you’re also working the system. I think people do
stuff like that all the time.

**Abbate:**

Do you think that’s more important for women, in terms of maybe having
to integrate some less conventional things into their career?

**Berman:**

I don’t know that it’s more important for women. I think that
oftentimes, depending on the family, a disproportional amount of child
rearing, social organizing, house cleaning, whatever, falls on women.
But that’s not true for all families. I think that when men pick up
their daughters from ballet lessons, they can suffer loss of credibility
too, depending on where they are in their career; and I think they don’t
get as much support for doing that as women do for being in the
workplace. So I’m not sure that I think this is just a women’s issue. I
think the issue is that in some venues—a lot of venues—there’s
intolerance for balance in life: good lip service, but general
intolerance at the fundamental level. I think that we’re in a culture,
in America, where we’re in this “excellence-at-all-costs” place, and I
think that’s hard for professionals at every level. You get a lot of
kudos from your colleagues for working 247, Christmas, holidays,
birthdays . . . People think you’re serious if you’re doing that, and
they kind of expect you to be doing that. I think everybody finds ways
to get something else in their life at some level, but I think that we
are almost encouraged to be secretive about that, as a general rule in
our society. When you’re in a more powerful place I think you can say,
“My daughter’s going to be a spoon today in the school play, and
that’s where I’m going to be.” So I think that it’s really
important—it’s incumbent \on people\ in positions of power—to say,
“I get it that you want to spend this time with your daughter—or your
son, or your mother, or whatever—rather than be at work.” But I do think
it’s a relatively intolerant society for the balanced lifestyle.

**Abbate:**

Have you been able to make any headway in that direction, as far as the
people who work under you are concerned?

**Berman:**

I think everybody who works under me knows that I think that family
stuff is important, and they know that I think they should be excellent
at what they do; and if they’re grown-ups, I assume that they’re going
to manage that mix well. If things aren’t working out, we can discuss
it, and discuss whether it’s a time issue, or whether it’s some other
set of issues. But I’m not a time-clock person. I don’t expect people to
be punching the time clock.

**Abbate:**

Do you find they’re actually more productive if they are able to have a
more balanced life?

**Berman:**

I don’t think that’s the key to it. I think productivity has to do with
the approach you bring to the job and the skills you bring to the job
and the expectations you bring to the job. A lot of the time, if you’re
good at your job, you’re going to be good at making a balanced life for
yourself, too\! I think it has to do with the person, more than the
number of hours they spend doing one thing or another. It’s an attitude
thing, I think, and an approach thing.

**Abbate:**

Well, great\! I think you’ve answered all my questions.

**Berman:**

Okay\! So: Thank you so much for talking to me\!

**Berman:**

Thank you\!

Retrieved from
"<http:ethw.orgindex.php?title=Oral-History:Fran_Berman&oldid=113020>"

Categories(Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* Computing and
  electronics(Category:Computing_and_electronics "Category:Computing and electronics")
* Computer
  science(Category:Computer_science "Category:Computer science")
* Parallel
  processing(Category:Parallel_processing "Category:Parallel processing")
* Home & family(Category:Home_%26_family "Category:Home & family")
* Diversity(Category:Diversity "Category:Diversity")
* Computer science
  education(Category:Computer_science_education "Category:Computer science education")

## Contents

* 1 About Fran Berman(#About_Fran_Berman)
* 2 About the Interview(#About_the_Interview)
* 3 Copyright Statement(#Copyright_Statement)
* 4 Interview(#Interview)
  * 4\.1 Background and Education(#Background_and_Education)
  * 4\.2 Using a Computer for the First
    Time(#Using_a_Computer_for_the_First_Time)
  * 4\.3 On Purdue University and UCSD(#On_Purdue_University_and_UCSD)
  * 4\.4 Being a Woman at UCSD(#Being_a_Woman_at_UCSD)
  * 4\.5 On Balancing Work and Family(#On_Balancing_Work_and_Family)
  * 4\.6 On Parallel and Grid
    Computing(#On_Parallel_and_Grid_Computing)
  * 4\.7 Working as Head of the NPACI and
    SDSC(#Working_as_Head_of_the_NPACI_and_SDSC)
  * 4\.8 On Commercializing Research(#On_Commercializing_Research)
  * 4\.9 The Treatment of Women in Computer
    Science(#The_Treatment_of_Women_in_Computer_Science)
  * 4\.10 Why Computer Science Is
    Interesting(#Why_Computer_Science_Is_Interesting)
  * 4\.11 On Bill Birnbaum and
    Mentorship(#On_Bill_Birnbaum_and_Mentorship)
  * 4\.12 How Computer Science Has
    Changed(#How_Computer_Science_Has_Changed)
  * 4\.13 Advice for Young Women Entering Computer
    Science(#Advice_for_Young_Women_Entering_Computer_Science)

!Powered by
MediaWiki(resourcesassetspoweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)(www.mediawiki.org)
!Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki(extensionsSemanticMediaWikiincludes..resourcesimagessmw_button.png)(https:www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 12 January 2015, at 12:57\.

* This page has been accessed 726 times.

* About ETHW(ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* Policies and disclaimers(ETHW:Policies "ETHW:Policies")

