Toggle navigation   

ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki(Main_Page)

* ** Go ****()
  * Browse by Subject(ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * Encyclopedia(Encyclopedia)
  
  * Oral Histories(Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * First Hand Histories(First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * LandmarksMilestones(/Landmarks)
  
  * Archives(Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * Education(ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * Random page(Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * Help(Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * Contact us(Special:Contact)
  
  * 
  * Recent changes(Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * New pages(Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* ** Actions ****()
  * View
    source(index.php?title=Oral-History:Barbara_Simons&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source e")
  
  * History(index.php?title=Oral-History:Barbara_Simons&action=history "Past revisions of this page [h]")
  
  * 
  * Oral-History(Oral-History:Barbara_Simons)
  
  * Discussion(index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Barbara_Simons&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page [t]")
  
  * 
* ** Tools ****()
  * What links
    here(Special:WhatLinksHere/Oral-History:Barbara_Simons "A list of all wiki pages that link here j]")
  
  * Related
    changes(Special:RecentChangesLinked/Oral-History:Barbara_Simons "Recent changes in pages linked from this page k]")
  
  * Special
    pages(Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages q]")
  
  * Printable
    version(index.php?title=Oral-History:Barbara_Simons&printable=yes "Printable version of this page p]")
  
  * Permanent
    link(index.php?title=Oral-History:Barbara_Simons&oldid=120962 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * Page
    information(index.php?title=Oral-History:Barbara_Simons&action=info)
  
  * Browse properties(Special:Browse/Oral-2DHistory:Barbara_Simons)
* ** Account ****(# "Account")
  * Log
    in(index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3ABarbara+Simons)
  
  * 
  * Request account(Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Barbara Simons

## About Barbara Simons

Barbara Simons received her Ph.D. in Computer Science from University of
California, Berkeley in 1981\. Following an on campus interview, she
joined the Research Division of IBM. There she focused on compiler
optimization, algorithm analysis and design and scheduling theory. Her
work on clock synchronization won an IBM Research Division Award. Over
her career, she became more focused on technology policy and
regulations. Before she left IBM, she had been promoted to Senior
Technology Advisor. She retired from IBM in 1998\.

While at IBM, she became active in the Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM), eventually becoming president after her retirement from
IBM. Under her direction the ACM became a more public and political
organization becoming involved in shaping technology legislation.
Recently, Simons has taught classes at Stanford and recently co-authored
a book highlighting the flaws in electronic ballots.

In this interview, Simons touches on various topics throughout her life
beginning with her early education, leaving college without a degree,
returning to school, her Ph.D., her time at IBM and current interests
about Technology Regulations. She goes in depth on her early research
interests in Scheduling Theories and her involvement in developing
technology regulations.

## About the Interview

BARBARA SIMONS: An interview conducted by Janet Abbate for the IEEE
History Center, July 11, 2002\.

Interview \#629 for the IEEE History Center, The Institute of Electrical
and Electronic Engineers, Inc.

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
the IEEE History Center Oral History Program, IEEE History Center at
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ
07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include identification of
the specific passages to be quoted, anticipated use of the passages, and
identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Barbara Simons an oral history conducted in 2002 by Janet Abbate, IEEE
History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

## Interview

INTERVIEW: Barbara Simons\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: July 11, 2002\
PLACE: Barbara Simon’s home in Palo Alto, CA

### Family and Early Life

**Abbate:**

It’s July 11th, and I’m speaking with Barbara Simons.

I always start at the very beginning, so can you tell me when you were
born and where you grew up?

**Simons:**

I was born January 26, 1941, in Boston, Massachusetts. I grew up in
Cincinnati, Ohio.

**Abbate:**

What did your parents do for a living?

**Simons:**

My dad was a lawyer. Well, my dad was trained as a lawyer, but he
actually ended up being—how would you call it? I’m not sure if
“executive” is quite the right word, but basically, he was running
non-profit Jewish institutions. When I was growing up in Cincinnati, he
was the Assistant to the President of Hebrew Union College, which is the
major institution for training Reform rabbis in the United States. He
was the Assistant to the President, but the President, who was Nelson
Gluck, was always off digging in Israel as an archaeologist, and so my
dad ran the place. From there he went to Brandeis, where he was
Assistant to the President, but he got tired of being under him; the
President was a difficult guy to work with. Eventually my father ended
up being the Executive Director of the National Jewish Hospital, the
last eighteen working years of his life, and he basically took it from
an institution which was on the verge of closing to a major medical
research institution. He was very proud of that.

At my daughter’s wedding, my father got drunk, and when he got up to
make his toast, he said, “If my name had been Heising”—which was the
name of the man my daughter was marrying, although she kept the name
Simons—“If my name had been Heising, I would have been Senator\!”
Because his name was Bluestein, and when he grew up, it was impossible
for a Jew to be elected to an office like that in this country—at least,
certainly, from Ohio; although there is a Jewish Senator now, I think,
from Ohio. But he was always interested in politics; my mother was, too;
so I grew up—in the Midwest, in the Eisenhower years, in the most
conservative major city in the United States—as a liberal Democrat. We
would talk about politics at the dinner table, which is something that I
think most Americans still don’t do. I was always very aware. And my dad
was a real good politician. That’s why he was such a good executive:
because he was very good at dealing with people. I use the word
“politician” in a positive way—unlike most people.

**Abbate:**

Did you have any brothers and sisters?

**Simons:**

I have a brother, who is three-and-a-half years younger. He’s off in New
York.

**Abbate:**

And what did he end up doing?

**Simons:**

He ended up getting a law degree, in spite of the fact that my father
had a law degree and he didn’t really want to follow in my father’s
footsteps. But he never liked the law, and he’s actually now working—has
been working for a number of years—for my former husband, who, after we
got divorced, went off and became extremely wealthy.

**Abbate:**

But nothing to do with computers.

**Simons:**

Well, he was a mathematician, and in fact, the major source of his
wealth is a hedge fund that he started, and it’s heavily, heavily
reliant on computers.

**Abbate:**

Ah, interesting.

Did you go to the regular public schools?

**Simons:**

Yes, I went to Walnut Hills. If you were from Cincinnati, you’d know
about it. It’s a college preparatory public school that goes from grade
seven through twelve. I had to take Latin for the first three years I
was there. They had just ended their Classical Greek requirement a few
years before I started.

It was an interesting place, because Walnut Hills was in a black
neighborhood when I went there. It was the best black neighborhood in
Cincinnati, which was a very segregated city. It was white when it was
built, but it was older; it was not such a new school; and as a result,
there were a number of black kids there. It’s the only time in my life
when I’ve really been in a reasonably integrated environment, when I had
some significant number of black friends. Also, I just assumed that all
public schools had copies of Greek and Roman statues in the halls\!
\laughs.\ With fig leaves, of course; they wouldn’t have had them
without. \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

I don’t think that was common\!

**Simons:**

No\! I mean, it was actually a very privileged experience. And being a
public school, it meant that for the first time in my life, when I
started going to Walnut Hills, I met a very diverse group of kids—even
though there were also ways in which we were segregated, by academic
achievement and so on. But everybody had to pass a test to get into the
school. When I was about to go to college, I thought, “Well, now I’ll
meet some really smart people,” and I discovered that they weren’t any
smarter than my friends from high school.

### Math in High School

**Abbate:**

Were you particularly drawn to math or science in school?

**Simons:**

Yes. When I was younger, I was a really lousy student \laughs\, and
even when I got to be a bit older, I wasn’t so good; but I discovered
that arithmetic, and then algebra, was just really easy. I remember when
I went to take algebra in the eighth grade, I heard from everybody about
how horrible algebra is. You know, everybody says, “Oh, it’s really
terrible. It’s going to be a horrible experience.” I was shocked: it was
just like doing puzzles; it was great fun.

Then, a couple years later, I found myself in the A.P. math class. It
was the second year they had A.P. math. When I went to school, any kind
of A.P. was very new; I think it started with math. It was the second
year they’d had an A.P. math class, so the class before me was the first
year, and it started in tenth grade, so I did grades ten through twelve.
Walnut Hills was one of the first schools in the country to do it. Maybe
Bronx School of Science did first, I don’t know; but it was that level.

I worked incredibly hard\! All of a sudden I discovered what it meant to
work hard, because we had a teacher who scared everybody. Her name was
Miss Becker. She was a big woman: about six feet tall, very broad
shoulders, with a booming voice. She called all the boys by their last
name, all the girls by their first; I don’t know why. The first year we
took this class, we had a homework assignment due every week and a test
every week, and if you didn’t do your work, she gave you hell\! So I
would stay up really late doing my math assignments, working with a
friend on the telephone sometimes.

Unfortunately, she retired after my junior year, and we had this man who
wasn’t very good, who didn’t know calculus. He was supposed to teach us
calculus; he did a lousy job. Then he fell out of a tree and broke his
leg in the middle of the year, and she came back and was just shocked at
the horrible state we were all in. I went to college shortly after that,
and I have to confess that even though I have a Ph.D. in theoretical
computer science, my calculus background is much spottier than it should
be\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

But it must have been much stronger up until the male teacher took over.

**Simons:**

Well, it’s kind of interesting. In the tenth grade everyone took plane
geometry—both A.P. and regular—but the A.P. kids had a different book;
and I would consciously put the book face-down onto my notebook so
people wouldn’t see it, because I felt very awkward. I didn’t want to
have the reputation for being brainy, especially because around that
time you start getting interested in boys, and it was pretty clear the
boys wouldn’t be interested in a girl who was smarter than they were, or
at least who was better in math than they were. So I tried to hide that
fact.

**Abbate:**

So were there not a lot of girls in the A.P. math?

**Simons:**

No. It started off, I think, eight girls and twenty-four boys in grade
ten. By grade twelve, there were four girls and twenty boys—so the
absolute loss was the same, but the percentage was much worse for the
girls. It was not the done thing, even in that school. I mean math, you
know; English, maybe, was okay.

**Abbate:**

Did your parents encourage you to do math and science?

**Simons:**

Well, they didn’t encourage me. They were very pleased I was good at
it—I mean, they encouraged me in that sense—but they didn’t push me in
that direction. Neither of them—actually, I suspect my mother had some
innate ability, but she never really learned math, and my dad didn’t
either—so already in high school I was doing stuff they couldn’t help me
with. But they were very proud of me, and I grew up in a family where
education was very, very important, so I knew my job was to do well in
school.

### Meeting and Marrying James Harris Simons

**Abbate:**

Where did you go to college?

**Simons:**

I went to Wellesley for a year. My parents had known the President of
Wellesley when they lived in Boston, and my dad always felt that
Wellesley was exactly the ideal. It’s a beautiful place; it’s gorgeous.
It was his dream of where to go to school, because he we went to the
University of Cincinnati, because my parents grew up in the Depression
and didn’t have much money—although my mother also got college
education. She almost got a Master’s Degree, which was a bit unusual
back then, when she went to school in the thirties.

I hated Wellesley\! \laughs.\ I’d never been in an all-women’s school,
and I felt stuck out in the middle of nowhere. I mean, it was beautiful,
but I didn’t like it. My freshman year, I took a juniorsenior math
class (although I probably shouldn’t have done that; I wasn’t very good
at it ) because I’d already had calculus, supposedly. Actually, the main
reason I did that was: When I first went to Wellesley, my parents moved
to Boston at the same time. I told you my dad was working at Brandeis as
the Assistant to the President; the year I went to Wellesley was the
year he took that job, so we all moved to Boston\! When we got there, my
mother called the mother of the man I eventually married (and got
divorced from). Our mothers had lived in the same apartment building
together, and he had come to my second birthday party. Anyway, my mother
called her, and they fixed us up, and we went out on a blind date. He
was at MIT at the time. He was a first-year graduate student in
mathematics; he’d done his undergraduate degree in three years—very
bright person.

We went out a little bit and didn’t hit it off too much, and we stopped
seeing each other, and then I ran into him again; but before we stopped
seeing each other, he encouraged me to take this juniorsenior math
class. He said, “Oh, you should be taking analysis\! You’ve done
calculus; take analysis.” It took me a long time to get the hang of
analysis. It was a struggle, but I got a B; it wasn’t disgraceful. But
meanwhile, the other young women in the class were thinking that I was
just this brain, because I was this little freshman taking a
juniorsenior math classes.

Anyway, I ran into Jim again the beginning of my second semester, when I
switched dorms. I ended up in a dorm where there was this woman from
Bogota, Colombia whom I’d met earlier when I went out with Jim for a
little bit. She was dating someone else from Colombia who was a good
friend of Jim’s, and through them I ran into Jim, and we started going
out again—and after four nights of going out every night, we decided to
get married.

**Abbate:**

Wow\!

**Simons:**

I had just turned 18\. That was really dumb\! He wasn’t much older; he
was 21\. We decided to get married, and we got engaged a few months
later, and we told our parents we wanted to get married. He was going to
Berkeley the following year, so we wanted to get married and have me go
out to Berkeley with him. My parents thought I was too young. So we
eloped\! Actually, we came to California first. My parents gave me
permission to come to California. Transferring wasn’t easy, because my
grades weren’t so terrific, but I came to California and started going
to Cal as an undergrad, my sophomore year. At one point, one of us said
“Let’s get married” and the other one said “Okay\!” So we scraped
together enough money to buy a round-trip bus ticket to Reno.

And then, I think six weeks later, I got pregnant. It was actually after
I got married, but I think a lot of people felt that it was a shotgun
wedding\!

**Abbate:**

Wow\! So you continued as an undergrad at Berkeley all that time?

**Simons:**

Well, my daughter was born in September; so I finished my sophomore
year, and I went to summer school quite pregnant. So: Liz was born, and
I think I took off the semester she was born. Then I went back to school
part-time, and Jim would stay back \in the apartment\ and baby-sit
when I’d go to school. He was doing research anyway.

At the end of that year, he got his Ph.D., and he won a special
fellowship at MIT. This was only after three years of college for
me—less than three, because I took off a semester when she was born,
and I was going part-time—so it didn’t even occur to me to stay behind
and finish my degree. So we went off to Boston. I applied to Brandeis’s
graduate school in mathematics. Well, I didn’t get in. They were quite
right in not accepting me, because I really wasn’t ready to do graduate
work in mathematics, but I decided, “Well, if they’re not going to
accept me, I’m not going to go. That’s it. I quit.” And I became a
housewife and mother for nine years. It’s interesting, because I was
following in the patterns that my mother had taken, I think; because I
think my mother had also dropped out after she married my father—shortly
after.

**Abbate:**

What had she been studying?

**Simons:**

English. She almost got a Master’s Degree in English. I think she didn’t
do her dissertation, but she had done a fair amount of the graduate
work.

### Following her Husband

**Abbate:**

Did you get a sense she wanted to avoid having you follow the same path?

**Simons:**

Yes and no. She certainly didn’t think I should get married at eighteen.

Let’s see: we were two or three years in Boston, and then we went down
to Bogota, Colombia in ‘63, I think it was; because Jim was restless. He
is a very restless person. He had gotten his Ph.D. in mathematics, but
now what? He decided he wanted to invest. He wanted to go into business.
And he had these Colombian friends, whom we had met at MIT, and they
were going to start a company, so we went down for the summer to see
what role he could play in the company. Let me get the chronology
straight: In ‘61, he got his Ph.D. He was at MIT ‘61-’62\. Then he was
thinking about this Colombia thing, but that didn’t work out, so he got
a year’s position at Harvard. Then he stayed on another year. Then he
got a job at IDA—Institute for Defense Analysis—in Princeton. He ended
up doing cryptographic research there, which he’d never done before, and
had his first encounter with computers—I mean, in a serious way. It was
the CDC-6400, I think, that they had there, and they got a 6600 while he
was there. He wasn’t into computers himself, but he could appreciate the
power of computers, and there were some good computer people there at
the time.

Anyway, we were there, and he was working at IDA, doing cryptographic
work. It was during the Vietnam War. Princeton, being a rather
conservative school, was one of the last schools to have anti-war
demonstrations, but they finally got around to having theirs; and what
the students did was blockade the entrance to IDA, which was on campus
at the time. Jim went to work that day, saw the students there, talked
to his boss, and said, “I really don’t think you should arrest them.
Just let them stay there. They’ll get tired, they’ll go home.” Which
would have happened; a bunch of Princeton undergrads, they’re not going
to \cause a major disturbance\. But people in Washington got nervous
about this. Maxwell Taylor was head of IDA at the time, and he was one
of the architects of the Vietnam War. Anyway, folks in Washington got
nervous because IDA had all this classified stuff on their computers. In
fact, an interesting sideline is: IDA had two libraries: classified and
unclassified; and when the Pentagon Papers came out in the New York
Times, you could not get a copy of the New York Times in the
unclassified library—which I think is a lovely little touch. But anyway,
they arrested the kids.

Around the same time, within a month or two one way or the other, there
was an article in the New York Times Magazine written by Maxwell Taylor,
the head of IDA; a pro–Vietnam War article. Now, Jim does not tend to be
terribly liberal politically, but he was living with me, and I think I
was having an influence on him; besides, it was the times and
everything: he was anti-war. Although he was actually anti-war for an
interesting reason; he was anti-war because he just thought it was a bad
idea for the United States: not for moral reasons, but for economic
reasons; economic and societal reasons. Anyway, he wrote a letter, which
was published in the “News of the Week in Review” section, saying, “Not
everybody at IDA supports the war. In particular, I don’t, for this,
this, and this reasons. Signed, Jim Simons, permanent member, IDA.”
Well, we subsequently found out that Taylor nearly blew a gut when he
saw this and wanted Jim fired immediately, but because he’d done some
important research, the head of where he was prevailed, and he wasn’t
fired. Also, after the students were arrested, he went to his boss and
said, “Look, I’m going to finish the classified work I’m doing now, but
I’m not going to do any more classified research till the war is over,
as my form of protest.” They said, “Okay.”

Some months later, a stringer for Newsweek came to Princeton to
interview people at the university about the anti-war efforts. He talked
to some folks in the math department who said, “You ought to go talk to
Simons,” because they’d seen his letter in the “News of the Week in
Review” section. So they went over and interviewed Jim. Now, at this
point he was still under thirty; I mean, we were still pretty young. I
just say this to explain what happened, that we were still pretty young
and ignorant. So he said to the reporter, “Well, yes: actually, as my
form of protest, I’m not doing any classified research till the war’s
over.” Then he went and he mentioned to his manager, “Oh, by the way, I
talked to this Newsweek reporter.” \laughs.\ I think that was on a
Friday. On Monday he goes to work, and then he comes back an hour or two
later, and he says, “I’ve been fired\!” \laughs.\ And he was shocked\!

It never appeared in Newsweek. I don’t know if someone squelched it, or
they didn’t think it was important enough, or what; but it never
appeared. But the very fact that he had said this meant that if this had
come out in Congress, all hell could have broken loose. They could have
been going after IDA—their funding—and that’s what they were worried
about. So he was fired\! Which was interesting, because he’s someone who
had always had success in his life, and this was really quite a shock to
him to be fired. I said, “Don’t worry about it, you’ll be fine.” I
wasn’t working; he was supporting the kids. At this point, I guess, we
had three kids. A little time went past, and he got a few job offers,
and he got this interesting call from Stony Brook, offering him the
Chairmanship of the Math Department there. Now, the only thing we’d
heard about Stony Brook up to that point was that they’d had a big drug
bust a few months before, which was in all the news. That was my image
of Stony Brook\! \laughs.\

### Beginning a Career as a Programmer

**Abbate:**

This is the State University of New York?

**Simons:**

State University of New York at Stony Brook.

So Jim thought about it, and he went out, and he took the job, and we
moved to Stony Brook. He was Chairman of the department; I was
Chairman’s wife. It was very good. I mean, I developed a lot of
skills. It was the only period of my life when I could remember people’s
names when I met them. I actually made a conscious effort to do it. So I
played Chairman’s wife, and at one point he was going to be Acting
Provost, and that’s when things really . . . Basically, I was not happy,
and I broke up the marriage. It was not a good time. It was a very hard
time. I had three little kids. I was stuck out in Stony Brook, which is
not exactly a big metropolis. I had no degree. I’d finished maybe three
years of college, if you count the A.P. credits, and I went to summer
school two summers: maybe three years. No abilities—I mean, nothing I
could go out a get a job with.

So: my dad said, “Why don’t you learn to program? I bet you’d be good at
it\!”

**Abbate:**

Really\! Why?

**Simons:**

Because he knew I was good at math, and he associated programming with
math. Now, actually, we both know you can be a good programmer without
being good at math; but he didn’t know. I didn’t know. I said, “Hmm\!
That’s an interesting idea.” So I decided to go back to school part-time
to Stony Brook. This was kind of interesting, because Stony Brook in
those days used your Social Security number as your student ID, and I
didn’t even have a Social Security number. I’d tutored math, but I’d
never had a real job. But I knew the President of the university on a
first-name basis\! \laughs.\ So they worked something out for me.

I started going back to school, and the first semester I went back, I
took Intro CS and linear algebra.

**Abbate:**

Were you actually in the math department?

**Simons:**

I wasn’t in anything; I was just taking courses part-time. I wasn’t in
any department. I was just taking courses, that’s all. But I knew enough
to know I had to register for them, that if I was just auditing I
wouldn’t do the work—because I had tried auditing, earlier, in my time
as a housewife, and as soon as things got bad I stopped working. I’m
basically lazy\! I knew I had to have some way to force myself to do the
work, so I actually registered for courses.

It was really quite a shock: going back after nine years out of school,
taking Intro CS, and being in a class with seventeen- and
eighteen-year-olds when you’re thirty. Feeling like their mother—which
of course I was wasn’t really old enough to be, but being in a different
world from theirs, for sure—and feeling incredibly insecure. So I took
Intro CS and math, and the guy who taught the linear algebra class, who
was named David Ebin, said to another math professor who was a friend of
mine, “You know, there’s this girl my class who looks a lot like Barbara
Simons.” And the guy said, “That is Barbara Simons\!” \laughs.\ Now,
this guy David Ebin had been at our house; I’d entertained him; but I
was in this Chairman’s wife niche, and I wasn’t in this student
\mode\—undergraduate, yet\! I mean, really\! Undergraduate, taking
linear algebra.

**Abbate:**

Were you working as well?

**Simons:**

No, money was never an issue. Jim gave me enough money. So I was
fortunate that money was not a problem. I didn’t have to work.

I did have my children, and I actually took in a woman to live with me,
with whom I became very good friends, and that helped a lot, because I
could go off after the kids were in bed, or even after dinner sometimes
(they’d go to bed themselves in some cases): I could go off to the
Computing Center, and she was there. She knew them, and they knew her,
and she knew the house. She was a student, quite a bit younger than I
am—although these days the difference is not very much; but in those
days it seemed like much more.

It really made a difference that I had that ability to go out, because
in those days, this was batch-mode stuff.

**Abbate:**

So you were probably there in the middle of the night?

**Simons:**

Yes\! You’d have to wait an hour to get the thing back, and if you’d
misplaced a comma, you’d have to start all over again.

Then I started going more and more to Computer Science, because I felt
more anonymous there. When I was taking math classes, I figured they all
knew me, and I thought, “Well, in the Computer Science Department, they
don’t know me.” Now, I discovered, a few years ago, that they did know
me\! \laughs.\ But I didn’t know that. I don’t think they knew me when
I took Intro CS, but at some point they did. Someone who was on faculty
there, John Chernowski, who’s now at the NSF: I run into him now and
then, and we would talk a lot, and he said that they knew who I was. But
I didn’t know they knew; so that made me feel more comfortable—because I
was very insecure, and I wasn’t sure I could do the stuff. You know,
there are times when you want to be anonymous\!

**Abbate:**

Oh, yes.

**Simons:**

And I just didn’t have that in the Math Department. So that’s one reason
I veered towards computer science. Plus, as my father said: “You can get
a job.” I figured once I had gotten a couple programming courses under
my belt, I was already ahead of the game, because I could get a
job—especially in those days, when there weren’t many people running
around with CS degrees. I didn’t need to get a job, but I wanted to have
the ability.

The way I got through all that was: once I had taken my first course, I
could look at it and say, “Okay, I’m already ahead of where I was when I
started.” So each time I took on something new, I figured, “Well,
\even\ if I fail at this, I’m ahead of the game.” I never started out
to get a Ph.D., because if I had, I wouldn’t have done it. There’s no
way. That didn’t occur to me, to get a Ph.D. I was just trying to make
these little baby steps. I mean, towards the end it wasn’t quite a baby
step any more, but I tried to think of it that way. “This is not that
much more that what I’ve already done, so maybe I can do it.” And that’s
how I did it. I also liked being in school.

**Abbate:**

So you got the B.S. at Stony Brook?

**Simons:**

I don’t have one.

### Getting her Ph.D.

**Abbate:**

But how did you end up getting a Ph.D.? At what point did you go back to
Berkeley?

**Simons:**

Well, I was just taking classes part-time. Chugging along, taking
classes part-time. This was in the early seventies, and computer science
was still a pretty shallow field. So after two or three years, I found
myself starting to take graduate courses. Now, in those days, compilers
and operating systems were graduate courses. It’s hard to believe now,
but they were in those days\! So I started taking graduate courses, and
someone said to me, “You’re starting to do the work for a Master’s
Degree, but you’re not registered; you’re not enrolled. You could end up
doing all the work and not getting anything, so why don’t you enroll?”
So I did. I applied to graduate school at Stony Brook in Computer
Science. I got in this time, because I had gotten straight A’s when I
went back to school, because I was a much more serious student—and also
because having little kids was a good excuse if I was late on stuff;
they would always give me extensions\! \laughs.\ I was often late. And
I was only going part-time, and I just had a different attitude, so I
had done very well. They all knew me. It was a small department, and as
I said, they knew me better than I realized they knew me, but they knew
me just from my work in taking the courses. So they admitted me, so I
got admitted to graduate school.

I spent a year as a graduate student at Stony Brook, during which time I
got involved with somebody who had got his Ph.D. in Math from Stony
Brook and wasn’t able to get a job. He went back to school, so we were
both graduate students together. He got his Master’s Degree during my
first year—he did a one-year Master’s—and then he got a job at Sonoma
State, out here; so I came out with him. Jim had been planning to go to
Switzerland for three months. I suggested to him, “Why don’t you go for
the year and take the kids?” He said, “Okay.” So the kids had a year in
Switzerland, and I had my first year at Berkeley.

I applied to graduate school at Berkeley. I didn’t get in, because I
applied too late, but I went out anyway and knocked on someone’s door,
because I had his name from another friend—I didn’t use Jim as a
contact, although I could have. He said, “Well, you really should have
been admitted, but it’s too late now. But why don’t you take my graduate
formal language theory class?” And then someone else gave me a job doing
some work. I guess when I first came out, I got a job teaching at the
Berkeley Adult School. I taught their intro to computer science course.
When I got that job, they were teaching this without using computers.
They were teaching computing from a book\! This was for the adults. I
said, “You know, you really \should have computers\. This is a
hands-on thing\!” So I managed to get the course moved over to Berkeley
High, because I think it was in the evening or something, so we got to
use the facilities at Berkeley High. I was teaching them BASIC—which I
didn’t know, so I had to learn it, but it’s not very hard.

**Abbate:**

You’d been working in FORTRAN(FORTRAN "FORTRAN")? Assembler?

**Simons:**

No, I didn’t know FORTRAN. I guess PL1; we learned PL/1\. My first
language was ALGOL-W, and then we were using PL1; that’s right. First I
learned ALGOL-W, and then I took an assembly language course—which I
loved, because it actually explained to me a little bit of how the
computers worked. I didn’t like being told, “You do this, and you do
that,” without understanding why; and in assembly language, you start to
get down to it. You understand what memory is and the CPU is and
registers are. It makes more sense.

Also, my year when I was a graduate student \at Stony Brook\, I had
worked part-time at Brookhaven \National Laboratory\. I got a job
working part-time in the Crystallography Department for this guy who had
a Varian 620i which was archaic even when I worked on it. It was really
amazing. He had this machine, which had 16K of memory—16 K\!—and then
another 4K that was supposed to interact with the experiment. I think
they were 16- or 18-bit words. It was nothing\! I had to bootstrap it
with paper tape. It had a hard disk, and there were two switches, and
you first have to turn it on and get it going fast enough, and then you
get the head moved over; and when you turn it off, you have to reverse
the process. If you do it wrong, you crash the disk. Crash\! I think
that must be how “crash the disk” came into being as a notion, because
the head would literally crash into the disk. I didn’t crash the disk,
but apparently someone else in the Crystallography Department had, a few
months before I got there, so everybody was telling me how I had to do
it.

This machine was so old, floating-point was in software. So my first
assignment was to check the floating-point, to make sure it was right.
It was a lot of work; I had to basically reverse-engineer this thing.
Then it got to the point where I could step through and read the words,
just look at the bits and read them; and I could invent new words,
because if you know what each field is for, and you set the flags and so
forth, you can create instructions that aren’t in the manual. I actually
found a slight mistake; I think it had to do with a rounding error or
something like that. I also found a mistake at the end in the algorithm
that this guy was trying to get me to implement. I found a mistake, and
he didn’t like that too much.

I just mention this experience because it has come up again recently
with all the policy issues, like the Digital Millennium Copyright act.
This is stuff I’m really heavily involved with now, and of course there
are all these attacks on reverse engineering. It’s interesting, because
if I had just followed what one would normally expect me to \with a
theory background, I wouldn’t have had that experience with reverse
engineering\. I got hired for this job because I told the guy I loved
assembler—which I thought I did. But if I hadn’t had this experience, I
wouldn’t really have a good understanding of what it’s all involved
with, because as I said, my area of research was theory.

**Abbate:**

Now, I know you said you got into programming because you thought it was
practical, but when you first used a computer, did you think, “Oh this
is really fun”? What was your reaction?

**Simons:**

I did think it was kind of fun. It was a little bit like my reaction to
algebra: “It’s like doing puzzles.” It was different from trying to do
mathematics, for example, because I knew that you could always solve the
problem and you could always write a program. I mean, I realize that
things are more complicated than that really, when you start looking at
massive programs and so on; but when I was learning this stuff, I knew,
“Give me an assignment, and I can write a program that will work
eventually. I may not get it to work right away, but in principle, I can
make it work.” Whereas if you give me a math problem to solve, I may or
may not be able to solve it.

**Abbate:**

So that was appealing?

**Simons:**

That made it interesting, yes. I mean, I like math, too, but I thought
that was an interesting aspect of programming. I mean, I didn’t know
about the halting problem at that point. I didn’t know that there are
things that you can’t do.

**Abbate:**

But at least maybe you can know if you couldn’t do it. Or maybe not; I
don’t know.

**Simons:**

Well, at the level I was doing it, I think my assumptions were correct.
I just didn’t understand some of the more sophisticated stuff then.

### Berkeley Years

**Abbate:**

So . . . Where have we gotten to?

**Simons:**

Where have we gotten? I went to Berkeley. I transferred to Berkeley, and
after the first quarter there I was admitted as a graduate student.
Typically, at Berkeley—when I was there, in 1975-76—they had you take
your Prelims at the end of your first year. These were oral exams, in
those days, in five different subjects. I was very nervous about it. I
had already had graduate school at Stony Brook a year, but I think if
I’d come from one of the higher-rated schools, some of what they were
teaching as graduate courses \at Stony Brook\ would have been taught
as undergraduate courses, even then; so I didn’t really feel like I had
all that. There were other students there who were from MIT and places
like that, whom I felt knew more than I did about many things. But my
mother convinced me. She said, “Take the Prelims\! What’s the worst
thing that can happen? If you flunk them, you can take them over again.”
And they do let you take them over once. So she pressured me to take
them, and I almost flunked them, but I did pass, and that was a
tremendous relief. So that was the end of my first year at Berkeley.

Then—I believe it was the following year—my \major field advisor got a
note from Admissions\. Berkeley has two people you work with: one is
your thesis advisor, if you’re a Ph.D. student, and the other is your
major field advisor, the person who signs your class cards and is
supposed to just give you general advice. Anyway, my Major Field Advisor
got a note from Admissions at Berkeley, saying I hadn’t met the
admissions requirements because I didn’t have a Bachelor’s Degree\! At
that point I had done a little piece of research already; I’d done
something original. I mean, it wasn’t real deep—I had generalized some
papers—but I had done something. So I said to him, “Okay, well, I’ll
write this up and get a Master’s Degree for it.” It wasn’t
earth-shaking, but it was enough for a Master’s Degree. He said “fine.”
\But\ no one told me to write it up. I never wrote it up\! \[laughs.\]
No one bothered me.

Then I chugged along, and I eventually did a dissertation. I ended up
doing that, also, in a funny way. I took a class in scheduling theory
from Gene Lawler, who died a few years ago from cancer; he was really a
lovely man. Anyway, I took a class in scheduling theory, and he gave us
a list of open problems. He said, “If you solve any of these open
problems, you don’t have to take a final.” Well, I hate finals\! At that
point I was living with one of these hotshot MIT-undergraduate graduate
students at Berkeley, who was really like my thesis advisor. He’s now a
Professor at MIT in the Applied Math Department; his name’s Mike Sipser.
Mike said, “Well, why don’t you try this problem? Take a special case of
it and see if you can solve it.” He was very encouraging, and I wasn’t
intimidated.

My thesis advisor was Dick Karp—you probably know the name.

**Abbate:**

I’ve heard the name, yes.

**Simons:**

Yes. Very sharp guy. He’s a Turing Award winner; he was one of the key
people in developing the theory of NP-completeness: very, very fast. I
was really intimidated by him. But I could talk to Mike about my ideas,
and because we were living together, I wasn’t intimidated by him. It was
also nice because all the guys in the department knew I was living with
Mike, and so it meant I could interact with them in a very free and easy
way. I don’t know if you’ve talked to other women about this, but this
is something which has come up: If you’re known to be attached, you can
then go up to some other guy and say, “Let’s work on this problem
together,” and they’re not going to wonder what you mean.

### Organizing Women

**Abbate:**

How many other women were there in the department?

**Simons:**

Oh, hardly any\! Actually, one of the things that I did with a woman
named Paula Hawthorn . . . Are you interviewing her?

**Abbate:**

Yes, I have talked to Paula.

**Simons:**

Did she talk to you about starting Women in Computer Science?

**Abbate:**

Yes.

**Simons:**

Well, she and I did that together.

**Abbate:**

Oh, right\!

**Simons:**

We started hanging out, because we both were divorced, older women with
kids. She was a year ahead of me at school; we were in different areas:
she’s in databases; I’m in theory. We’re both politically aware. I think
she was involved in the Civil Rights Movement.

**Abbate:**

Yes, she told me about that.

**Simons:**

We’re still very good friends. So we decided to start organizing lunches
with other women graduate students, because there were so few of us, and
we did. Her boyfriend at the time—I think this guy is now her
husband—found out that there was money from the Student Association
available for student activities, so we decided to organize a
conference. Did she tell you about the conference we did in ‘78? This
was wonderful: a conference to try to bring in more women to computer
science. We’d been having these lunch meetings once a week, a few of us
getting together for a bag lunch in the common room, and we heard about
this money. Well, you can’t get it unless you’re a student organization,
so we decided to become a student organization. We called ourselves
Women In Computer Science—WICS—and our method for electing officers was,
the first person to go to Sproul Hall to register was the President; the
second one was the Vice President \! \laughs.\ I think Paula was the
first President that we had, and I think I was the second President that
we had. We applied for $600 to run a conference and got $60\. Well, what
do you do with sixty dollars?

**Abbate:**

Do you know why you got only sixty?

**Simons:**

Well, my theory is that they had a ten-percent algorithm; and if we’d
know that, we would have applied for six thousand\! But around this time
Sheila Humphreys appeared on the scene. She was still at Berkeley, and
she was working for the Women’s Center then. The three of us got
involved with this, and Sheila ended up organizing the conference in
about four months’ period. It was called “Working in Computer Science
and Engineering.” She was very organized, and in those days, there was
tons of money. I remember Paula and I were once invited to a faculty
lunch where we talked about this, and some people who were representing
various companies pledged some money for it, and I think the College of
Engineering agreed to match what we raised, so we ended up with a total
for the conference of six thousand dollars\!

That’s the first time this had ever been done at Berkeley. It was held
on a Saturday. Elizabeth Scott was one of the people there. Elizabeth
Scott at that point was Chair of the Stat Department, a crusty old woman
who reminded me of my math teacher from high school\! She got into
statistics because she had been an astronomy student as a graduate
student, and they wouldn’t let her use the telescope because they didn’t
want to waste time having a woman using the telescope, so she switched
fields and became a life-long feminist. She happened to be present in
one of the sessions where one of the Assistant Deans was supposed to be
talking about how to get in to the college, or transfer; and he was so
negative: he said basically, “You need a 4\.0 GPA, and even then you
probably won’t get in.” He was exactly not what he should have been, and
she got so pissed she wrote a letter, and the guy was fired from being
Dean. So that was one of our major accomplishments. We didn’t like him
either.

There was also one other thing that I rather enjoyed. Because Paula and
I were two of the organizers, we were on the Introductory Panel; we were
each given seven minutes to talk. It was interesting, because some of
the guys who were graduate students with us came to the conference to
watch us, and afterwards one of them said to me, “I finally understand
what it’s like for you to be in a class with all men.”

**Abbate:**

Because he was in a room full of women?

**Simons:**

Yes; and if he said something, everyone would turn around and look\!
Which is in fact what happened \to a male Dean\. I was giving
statistics from the college, so I started off saying, “As of the Fall of
this year, there were this percentage of undergraduates and graduates,
and one woman faculty member.” That was Sue Graham, in the College of
Engineering. And the Dean—the real Dean, the full Dean—was seated in the
audience, and he shouted out, “That’s not true\!” I continued reading,
and my next sentence said, “As of the next semester, it was doubled to
two.” And the audience went apeshit, and the guy didn’t say another
word\! \laughs.\ It was totally unplanned, but he just played right
into it.

That’s how bad things were. And they’re not much better at Berkeley
now—somewhat better, but still not great.

### Ph.D. Research Subject

**Abbate:**

I’m not sure I heard the end of the scheduling story. I assume you
solved the problem . . .

**Simons:**

Oh, right. Mike told me, “Why don’t you work on this problem?” So I
started working on this problem.

I can tell you the problem. It’s real easy. You have a computer science
degree?

**Abbate:**

No, but you can try explaining it.

**Simons:**

Well, it’s not computer science. Think of it this way: You have a
runway, and you have planes you want to land. Now, we’re going to make
some very unrealistic assumptions, because that’s what the problem
explores. Let’s assume each airplane takes exactly the same amount of
time to land. You only have one runway, and you can’t have two planes
landing at the same time, obviously. You’re the Air Traffic Controller,
and at the beginning of the day you’re given a list of planes. For each
plane you’re given a time called the “release time,” which is the time
that it can be landed, and the deadline, which is the time by which, if
it’s not landed, it runs out of fuel. Let’s suppose another unrealistic
assumption: you can land them instantly. You say “Land now,” and it’s
down, and it takes a certain amount of time, and then it’s off.

Translating this to computerese, it’s like you want to schedule jobs in
the computer. Each job takes the same amount of time to run, and you
have a release time and a deadline. The computer can run the jobs
consecutively, so you don’t have any interrupts: you just start the job
and run it to completion. You can’t start a job before its release time,
and you have to complete it by its deadline. So the question is: Can you
schedule these jobs such that everybody gets to run and no one misses
its deadline, given an arbitrary list?

What was known was, if all the release times and the deadlines are
integer, and the running time (or the time to land the plane) is one,
then you can solve the problem. \“Solving the problem” doesn’t
necessarily mean you can schedule the jobs; it means you know whether or
not you can schedule the jobs.\ It’s actually, I think, very
straightforward, although I once gave this as a test on an exam or a
homework assignment and the students found it harder than I thought they
would. It’s pretty straightforward. If you want to play with something,
you can think about it. for the generalized version, there are two ways
of looking at it. One is, suppose that the times that they all take
(which are still all the same) are greater than one. The one fits
nicely, because you’ve got integer boundaries; there’s no way that
something can be released in the middle of something else being run. Or
you can say, “Suppose the release times and deadlines aren’t integer.”
Either way, they’re more or less the same; not entirely, but more or
less equivalent.

So that was an open problem. The open problem was: Can you determine,
given a set of release times and deadlines, if you can schedule them?
Can you determine that in polynomial time, or is it an NP-complete
problem? In those days, a few years before I got my Ph.D., people were
still getting Ph.D.s for showing that problems were NP-complete. By the
time I got my Ph.D., they weren’t anymore, but it was only a few years
before that they were. I think when I came to Berkeley that still might
have been a possible way of getting a Ph.D.

The generalization that I looked at—and Mike may have suggested it; I
wouldn’t be surprised—was, “Assume they all take two units, instead of
one unit.” Integer release times and deadlines, and all the jobs take
two minutes. Now you do have the problem where you can start a job at
time “three,” say, and something can be released at time “four.” So the
question is, “Can you schedule that?” Well, I worked on that problem,
and I solved it\! I came up with an algorithm. Now, it’s still a very
special case.

So I’m feeling terrific, and Gene says, “Oh that’s great\!” Then Ashok
Chandra, who was at IBM at the time, came to town, and he was there as a
recruiter for IBM Research. He was there to interview students who were
getting their Ph.D.s about possibly coming to IBM. Now, I knew I wasn’t
going to graduate that year, but I thought I might well graduate the
next year, because I had a partial result towards a thesis. It wasn’t a
thesis but it was a partial one. So I said, “Well, I’ll sign up to see
him, just to have the experience. This is just practice.” Our meeting
was scheduled for the end of the day, and I was older and more secure,
so I said, “Let’s go for coffee.” I’m very relaxed, thinking “This
doesn’t count.” So we went out for coffee, and he said, “What have you
been doing?” I said, “Well, I have this result.” He said “Oh yes? Tell
me about it.” So I told him about it. He said “Very interesting\! Very
interesting.”

The next day he comes and knocks on my office and says, “You know that
problem you’re working? I solved it\!” \I thought,\ “You what? That
was going to be my thesis\!” \laughs.\ So I’m in a state of
quasi-shock, and he says, “Oh, yes\! Well, let me just show you how,”
and he starts drawing on the board, and I stare at it, but I don’t
really follow what he’s doing. He said, “We’ll write a paper. You write
the introduction, I’ll write this up, and we’ll have a joint paper.” He
leaves, and I run over to Lawler and say, “Gene, Chandra said he solved
the problem\!” \laughs.\ So Lawler comes back to my office, and we
look at the board, and neither of us can figure out what he’s done.
After a couple days of calming down, I decided to go ahead. Again, Mike
said, “Look: work on the problem and see if what you’re doing will
come.” What eventually happened was, the version that Chandra claimed
he solved was: Suppose that the length of the job is P, for some integer
P—so it’s clearly more general than \a job length of\ two—and then he
said it was polynomial in P. It still wasn’t the most general version.
The most general version would be that you can have arbitrary release
times and deadlines, as long as they can be compared; so you could have
something which is not integer in length. Anyway, I continued working on
my approach, which was different from his—it was actually really weird;
it was a recursive algorithm—and I solved it for the most general case.
In fact, my solution was something like N2log(N), which was better than
something which was polynomial in P.

I wrote up the proof and submitted it to a conference, and it was
accepted. I remember when I got there, Garey and Johnson—you know who
Garey and Johnson are, right? They wrote this book, \Computers and
Intractability: A guide to the theory of NP-completeness. W.H. Freeman,
1979\. Mike Garey and Dave Johnson. They’re two prominent theoretical
computer scientists, and they were working in scheduling theory. They
had heard about this result and they wanted to talk to me, so they were
sort of cornering me there. Mike was there, and he was sort of helping
me. They were asking me all these questions. Someone else said to me,
“Your proof is one of the most complicated proofs I’ve ever seen for
an algorithm,” because the algorithm was recursive; to prove it’s
correct is rather convoluted. And I still had a feeling that there was a
better way of doing it, and then I struggled for another year or two. I
think I didn’t come up with it until I went to IBM, but I finally came
up with this really clean, simple way of doing it. So easy\! And it’s
not recursive, and it generalizes to multiple machines, so you have an
arbitrary number of runways.

That was my thesis. One thing I screwed up on, because nobody told me.
Garey and Johnson, these people I mentioned, were writing a book on
NP-completeness, which is the sort of the classic book on it; and in the
back of the book they were going to have “Major Open Problems,” and one
of the open problems was going to be the problem I solved. But because I
solved it just before they went to press, they took it out as one of the
Major Open Problems. They referenced me; my name is in their book; but
it would have been much better if I could say, “I solved one of the
major open problems in Garey and Johnson\!” But nobody told me.

**Abbate:**

What kind of conference was that?

**Simons:**

It was a theory conference. I think that was IEEE CS. I wasn’t involved
with ACM at the time. I didn’t know from ACM and IEEE CS; all I knew was
there were two major theory conferences every year, and the same people
went to both of them.

**Abbate:**

So you got the Ph.D. in ‘81?

**Simons:**

I got the Ph.D. in ‘81—but I almost didn’t get it, because I hadn’t met
the Admissions requirements.

**Abbate:**

Because you still didn’t have a Bachelor’s?

**Simons:**

So here I am, working at IBM Research, and I’m supposed to go up to
Berkeley to get the title page for my dissertation. I’ve done
everything: I’ve passed my exams; I’ve written up this really nice
result; and so I just had to get the signatures of my thesis committee.
So I go to Sproul Hall, and they give me this title page that says,
“Master’s Degree from Stony Brook.” Somewhere, someone had flipped a
bit saying I’d gotten a Master’s Degree at Stony Brook, which of course
I hadn’t. And I stupidly said, “I don’t have any Master’s Degrees\!” She
said, “Oh\! Okay, we’re going to have to retype it then.” So I go back
to IBM. A week later I called Dick Karp. I said, “Dick, have you gotten
my title page?” And he said “No.” So he called, and he found out that
they weren’t going to give it to me\! So Dick scrounged around and
discovered that you can get a Master’s Degree in Computer Science
through taking an oral exam. No one had ever done it, but you could. So
we had a virtual oral exam\! \laughs.\ At any rate, I got a Master’s
Degree and a Ph.D. at the same time. My parents came, and I was the only
woman on stage. I went to the ceremony because my parents came; they
hadn’t seen me graduate since high school, and I was forty-one now. They
came, and they were very proud of me, and when I went up to be hooded,
yelling started in the audience\! I mean, my mother started it. She was
standing up, screaming. I expect other people joined in because I was
the only woman on the stage.

**Abbate:**

Was that just the School of Engineering?

**Simons:**

Yes. There were some people there who know me because I had been
involved with this conference and other stuff. But it was the loudest
applause anyone got. I was the only woman\! Anyway, that was nice. It’s
nice when you have something like that. I wouldn’t have done it if it
weren’t for my parents coming. I would have just taken the Ph.D., but I
wouldn’t have gone to the ceremony. There were, I think, one or two
other women getting Ph.D.s that year; they just didn’t go to the
ceremony. But there weren’t many.

### Starting at IBM

**Abbate:**

Now, you got the job at IBM because of that interview?

**Simons:**

Oh, no, no. Because Chandra was from Yorktown, and I ended up going to
San Jose.

**Abbate:**

So you interviewed again for IBM?

**Simons:**

Basically. And they wanted to hire both Mike and me, and they did, so we
both started off at IBM Research; but then Mike wanted to have some time
off somewhere else, so he went to MIT for a year. That was when we broke
up.

I ended up at IBM Research, which was good and bad. The department, when
I was there, became one of the top departments in the country for
theory—in the world, maybe. At one point, it was really an
extraordinarily good department. I’ve always had an interest in
politics, and I started doing ACM stuff while I was there, and I got
more and more involved with that; and I had more time to do it than I
would have had at a university, so in that sense it was good. Of course,
it wasn’t valued, but I had more time. But on the other hand, it was
also constraining. I got myself into trouble at IBM a couple times, and
that wouldn’t have happened at a university.

I started at IBM in ‘81\. I was at IBM Research most of the time. I left
finally in ‘98\.

**Abbate:**

Now, did they have a specialty in the center?

**Simons:**

Yes, we had different groups. I was in the Theory Group. The Theory
Group started when I came there. As I say, it became very, very good.
The first few years I was there were just a great time to be at IBM,
because this was before IBM started feeling the pinch. In the late
eighties, Microsoft and Intel were up-and-coming, in large part thanks
to poor business judgments made by the CEO of IBM at the time.

**Abbate:**

But the early ‘80s was still the PC boom?

**Simons:**

Well, it wasn’t just that; it was mainframes. Mainframe was the big
thing for IBM. And then they built Almaden \Research Center\, and I
was there during that period. But then, around the time that they were
building Almaden, things started to happen. You started feeling the
pinch, and of course it got worse and worse.

**Abbate:**

Now, were you sort of free to pursue whatever you wanted?

**Simons:**

I was free to pursue whatever I wanted, but they expected me to produce;
to do good research. Of course, “doing good research” had certain
definitions that meant papers in specific conferences, and I started
getting more peripheral interests relative to the main focus of the
group. I discovered, for example, that in scheduling theory, it doesn’t
make a whole lot of sense to talk about “jobs” and “computers,” because
that’s not the way it works. It does make sense to look at compilers.

### Problems at IBM

**Abbate:**

Now, where were we? You were at IBM. What were some of the major things
you accomplished there, or projects that you worked on?

**Simons:**

Well, I think some of the work I did on compiler optimization was
interesting, and then I got into some other areas, too. I did a little
bit of work on communicating sequential processes. Again, all
deterministic stuff.

I enjoyed the research, but as I say, I was also getting pulled more and
more by policy issues. I guess the first time this really happened was
when SDI appeared: the Strategic Defense Initiative \also known as
“Star Wars”\. I was at that point organizing a workshop on
fault-tolerant distributed computing, which was an area I had also done
some work in. Someone on my Program Committee suggested that the
computing issues for Star Wars were basically fault-tolerant distributed
computing issues, and maybe we should have a debate on that, or a panel
on that, or something like that at the workshop. And somebody else said,
“No, that’s all political.” So we got into a debate on this. I mean, I
felt that there were certainly technical issues, and there clearly are.
So I said, “Well, why don’t we try a dry run at IBM and see what it’s
like?” So I decided I would organize a debate.

I don’t know if you followed that issue. Do you know about \David\
Parnas and his role? Parnas is a computer scientist. He’s now up in
Canada, but at the time he was not in Canada. In fact, I think all of
this had to do with his going to Canada. Anyway, he was on the SDI
Computer Science Panel, and he resigned from it over this, and he wrote
ten short papers as to why it wasn’t going to work. He did that, I
think, because they asked him why he was resigning, and then it got
distributed all over the Net. This was in the early days of the Net, of
course. So I got him. I think the first person I asked was Richard
Garwin, who, together with Teller, did the hydrogen bomb, and who had
been the head of Yorktown Research Lab at one point. He was an IBM
Fellow, and I think he’s probably in the National Academy of Science: a
prominent guy.

**Abbate:**

So he was pro-SDI?

**Simons:**

Anti. And he was speaking out quite publicly about being anti. So I got
him—he was an IBMer—and I got Parnas, and then I got the President of
Cal Tech to moderate.

**Abbate:**

So, who was the pro-SDI speaker?

**Simons:**

I didn’t have him yet\! \laughs.\ At that point, I mentioned to my
second-level manager—who I think was Maria Klawe, who is now President
of ACM—that I had all these people lined up. She said, “Well, maybe you
ought to go talk to the head of the Lab about this\!” So first I talked
to this woman who was the head of P.R., and we had what I thought was a
lovely conversation. The next day I was scheduled to meet with the head
of the Lab, and I walk in there and he says, “We’ve got to kill this.”
And she’s sitting there. I said “What? How can you kill it? I’ve got the
President of Cal Tech\!” And she’s saying, “Oh, we can’t have it here
because if the press comes and they hear that people are saying bad
things about SDI, they might think that IBM is taking a stand on it.”
You see, my idea was to have computer scientists and physicists on each
side, and the President of Cal Tech, who happens to be a physicist, to
moderate. So I kept on emphasizing the fact that I had Garwin, I had all
these people; so he said, “Let’s see what we can do.” So they spoke to
some folks at Stanford, and they got Stanford to agree to host it, and
IBM would pay the money under the table.

Meanwhile, my former husband was helpful. He knew the Undersecretary of
Defense, a guy named John White, and I contacted John White, and he put
me in touch with a guy named Major Simon Peter Warden, who was the Chief
Scientist for the SDI Office. So I got him, and then I got Dick Lipton,
a prominent theoretical computer scientist who was also on the same
committee that Parnas was on, but who was supporting it. So I actually
put together a very balanced debate. In fact, it was so balanced, I
thought actually the pro-SDI side did better—which was not my view of
it.

So it was held at Stanford. There was an overflow crowd. Unfortunately,
it was right before Christmas, so it didn’t get much press, but it was
taped, and then they were projecting it to a couple of overflow rooms. I
mean, it was a huge crowd. They acknowledge me as organizing it, and no
one ever asked, “Well, she organized it, and she’s at IBM, and this is
at Stanford. Why?” Of course, all these worries that these people had at
IBM were ridiculous. I mean, there’s no way someone could go to that and
say that IBM was taking a position because it was held by IBM. And
Garwin, ironically, was speaking against SDI at Yorktown without anyone
opposing him\! Some people are afraid of their shadows.

So that got me a big black mark against me at IBM. It wouldn’t have been
held against me at a university. It was held at a university, and people
thought it was great. It would have been considered a plus, probably;
but at IBM you’re not supposed to rock the boat. I think people were
already nervous, especially these P.R. people, about all these funky
researchers who don’t really fit into the IBM mold to begin with. I
wasn’t unique in that respect.

I had another amusing experience a few years later—although it really
pissed me off at the time. I heard a talk at Xerox
PARC(Xerox_Palo_Alto_Research_Center_\(PARC\) "Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC)")
by a guy named Bernstein, who was at Stanford in the Disarmament program
there. It was something like that; Weapons Control, maybe. And he was
talking about the issues of having these treaties that cut down weapons,
and all the issues of verifying them and how you do it and so on, and he
raised some interesting technical issues. For example, one of the things
he said was, “It’s much easier to go to zero than to just cut things by
a significant percentage, because if you cut, there’s still
justification for the infrastructure, whereas if you go to zero, there
is no justification, and frequently it’s easier to spot infrastructure
\than weapons\.” I thought, “Well, this is a fascinating talk. It
would be interesting to have it at IBM.” So I invited him, and I got it
on the calendar, except when I saw the announcement, they only printed a
portion of the title, and that portion didn’t explain what it was about.
So I called up the woman who did the calendar and I said, “Can you redo
something, or at least online change the title, because it’s not obvious
what it’s about.” So then they noticed it.

So I’m home, and I get a call from somebody: “Do you know that talk was
canceled?” I said, “What?” Anyway, I got on the phone. It turned out the
P.R. person had seen the title. This was a few weeks before the
election. It must have been the Bush election, and Dukakis ran against
Bush. And she said, “People are going to think that we’re supporting one
candidate.” So she went to the head of the Lab and said, “We’ve got to
kill this.” Nobody checked with me about what it was about\! In fact, it
was not a political talk. He was talking about technical issues
surrounding disarmament, which is a perfectly legitimate talk, I think,
for a technical lab. Xerox thought it was perfectly legitimate. So I got
my manager on the phone, and we’re back and forth, and I had to reach
the guy and tell him not to come. Anyway, I think it was un-canceled,
but a lot of people didn’t know it was un-canceled. The number two
person at the Lab was the one, I think, who made the decision. I went
and I talked about it. When it was rescheduled—when they agreed the guy
would come—he came to the talk, and then afterwards I talked with him,
and he agreed with me; he said it was not political. Of course,
meanwhile I had told the guy, “Please be careful what you say\!” And
some people asked him leading questions, and he wouldn’t touch them.

**Abbate:**

Was the general atmosphere just very conservative?

**Simons:**

Not in my group. My group was not. In fact, they put out these brochures
for the Lab, I think when Maria \Klawe\ was Manager, and we had a
picture of us taken with people in a tree\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Do you have a picture of that?

**Simons:**

I might have it somewhere around. I don’t know if I’ve thrown them out
or not. I could try to track it down for you.

**Abbate:**

It would be fun to see.

### Continuing Problems at IBM

**Simons:**

I think the heading was, “Theory Group in a Tree.” \laughs.\ And one
day we all came in wearing shorts. My group was not like that, but you
know: it’s IBM.

I was frequently told, as the years went on, by my management that I had
a lot external visibility, but that I needed to focus more on my
research, because the external visibility didn’t count. This was because
of all the ACM work I was doing. In ‘93 I started US-ACM, which is the
U.S. Public Policy Committee. I was ACM Secretary from ‘90 to ‘92\. This
is a good story, too. It’s the third of the three top elected positions
in ACM; there’s President, Vice President, and then Secretary was the
third; and I was being groomed to be the next President. Everybody
expected I would be the next President. But basically, I was told by the
head of the Lab that if I accepted the nomination, I would be fired.

**Abbate:**

Really? Because they thought it would just take time away from your
research?

**Simons:**

\Nods.\

**Abbate:**

Were you advancing on whatever the internal track was?

**Simons:**

Well, there was no real track. You see, the thing about the Research Lab
is that it was pretty flat. You have researchers and then you have
managers. First-level managers also do research, and they have a few
people under them; they’re usually colleagues and they do research.
Second-level managers tend not to do research. But at the bottom,
everyone is a Research Staff Member: that’s it. So there are no titles.
I mean, there’s Research Staff Member; and I think if you don’t have a
Ph.D., you may not be a Research Staff Member, so there may be that
discrepancy; but aside from that, once you’re a Research Staff Member,
that’s it.

**Abbate:**

So they just wanted you to accumulate a certain number of publications?

**Simons:**

Well, clearly salaries vary a lot, and rankings. They would do a total
ranking every year, of everybody in the Lab.

**Abbate:**

And that was based on what?

**Simons:**

On your managers’ appraisals, basically. The managers would do a total
ranking of their group, and then people in the same department get
together and do a merge—so then you’d physicists and computer scientists
and chemists all merging\! How they did that I don’t know.

**Abbate:**

Did you feel that gender entered into that, in terms of promotions or
salaries at IBM?

**Simons:**

Well, I think gender probably did enter, in terms of my being told I
couldn’t run for President. Breaking into policy was not easy, because
policy, I think, tends to be viewed as a man’s game. Policy, politics:
when you start getting into areas where you’re dealing with power, it’s
something the guys like to do. So I felt all along that if I had been
six-foot-two and had a nice baritone voice, it would have helped a lot\!
(And been male \laughs\; those things as female wouldn’t have
helped\!)

**Abbate:**

So even though you were being invited to take a position of power, IBM
didn’t like that.

**Simons:**

Well, this guy didn’t like it. It was the head of Department. So it
wasn’t my manager; it was my third-level manager. I had been sort of
warned that I was spending too much time on policy stuff, on ACM stuff.

**Abbate:**

But you think if you were a man, that wouldn’t have been such an issue?

**Simons:**

It seemed to me that with an organization like IBM, one of the things
they care about is visibility and prominence in the community, right?
And being President of ACM is a big deal\! It didn’t dawn on me that
they’d give me trouble over that until it happened.

**Abbate:**

You obviously did become President of ACM . . .

**Simons:**

But not then\!

**Abbate:**

So you ducked that?

**Simons:**

I ducked it because I wasn’t prepared to be fired. I don’t know if he
would have fired me or not. I mean, I could have said, “Okay, I’m going
to do it, and you fire me and I’ll go public.” But I didn’t have
anything else lined up, and I wasn’t prepared to be fired, so I didn’t.

But the SDI thing had got me interested in technology policy issues, and
then, in between all this, I got involved with this crazy idea of doing
a study on federal funding of academic computer science. I’m doing all
this when I’m supposed to be doing research—I mean, I’m doing research
too, but obviously this is taking time. During the Reagan years, as you
know, a lot of money was shifted to military stuff. I hired Joel Yudken,
who was just finishing his Ph.D. in Science, Technology, and Society at
Stanford; he’s now with the AFL-CIO. We had an interesting time, he and
I. For example, in ‘76, if you look at computer science in the United
States, it was about fifty-fifty NSFDOD; by ‘88 it was two-to-one
DODNSF. Furthermore, a lot of DOD funding was becoming more applied. It
was definitely having an impact. Joel was actually doing the work. He
was interviewing people and getting information and getting statistics;
at one point we had more information than anybody else did on this
subject—more than the NSF, I think, because we were looking at other
things.

### Taking a Package to Leave IBM

**Abbate:**

When did you finally leave IBM?

**Simons:**

In ‘98, when I became ACM President. Actually I left before I became
President.

**Abbate:**

Did you consciously think, “Well, I want to do this, so this is going to
be the end of my IBM job?”

**Simons:**

I was very unhappy at IBM by that point. When the stock dropped to
almost zero—it was down to 40, when it had been up to 170 a year or two
before—we started getting more and more pressure—especially me, because
I was doing more and more policy stuff, I was doing less and less of
what they wanted me to do, and the stuff I was doing wasn’t the kind
they wanted me to do. I was doing compiler optimization; I was doing
communicating sequential processes; but this was not mainstream theory.
It was theory, but it wasn’t mainstream. So my manager starts saying,
“Barbara, you’ve got to do something. You’ve got to have IBM impact.”
In fact, that’s what the guy said to me when he said I couldn’t run for
President: “You’ve got to have more IBM impact.” Well, what is IBM
impact? How do you have IBM impact? Here we are stuck in this nice
building up on a hill away from the rest of IBM. What does it mean to
have IBM impact?

So in ‘92, it was the first package they had for people to leave IBM,
and my manager comes to me and says, “I think it would be a good idea if
you would take it.” Augh\! On Wednesday; the deadline’s Friday. Susan
Landau—I don’t know if you’ve interviewed her—was coming to visit me
that day. We didn’t know each other very well. She was going to stay
here, and she comes in the middle of my life being in total chaos, which
she remembers quite well\! I was supposed to have someone come and visit
me over the summer to work with me, a guy I was working with on
communicating sequential processes research. I talked to him, I think,
about this too, and he came up with the suggestion that if I take the
package, I should at least tell them I’d like to remain over the summer.
So what happened was: on Friday, I decided to take the package, and they
agreed that I could stay on over the summer. I wouldn’t be a regular
Research Staff Member anymore; I’d be a visitor or whatever, so that I
could continue working with Peter over the summer. I took the package on
Friday. The following Thursday I get a phone call from the Vivek Sarkar,
with whom I had done some research on compiler optimization, saying,
“Barbara, I’m starting this new group on compiler optimization. I’d
love to have you join. It’s going to be in Santa Theresa.” Vivek had
been in Theory, but he had left and come back as a manager. He said he
was starting this new group, and I had worked with Vivek and I really
loved working with Vivek. He knows about applied stuff, but he can also
talk about theoretical stuff, and we work together well. So he calls me
on Thursday and says he’s starting a new group he wants me to join.
“Vivek, I just left IBM\!” \laughs.\

### Continuing at IBM

What ended up happening was, after the summer, I went back to Santa
Theresa. Then they said they that they don’t want people in that state:
a lot of people apparently had taken the package and stayed on like I
had, and the goal was to get people out\! So the message comes down
comes down from on high: “We don’t want people taking the package to
stay on.” So they said, “Okay, well I guess we’ll have to make you a
regular employee again.” \laughs.\ So I was made an employee again\!
But it was \accidental\; I wouldn’t have chosen to go through that
route; but it was like much of my life: kind of nonstandard.

I worked with Vivek for a few years, and then he left. He went East, and
the group basically broke up, and I was sort of stuck with having to
find a place for myself. I almost got a position doing policy for IBM.
It turns out that my getting that job was killed by people in IBM
Washington, who knew me but didn’t want me there\! I’d gone to visit
them once, and I was very unimpressed. They didn’t have anyone technical
there. And I don’t really fit into the IBM mold, quite frankly; although
I think the IBM mold would be improved if they were more willing to take
people like me in.

So I didn’t get that job, and I ended up going to this other part of
IBM, which was called Global Services. I was supposed to be working on
help desk stuff. I had a manager who expected us to be in at a
reasonable hour; I wasn’t used to that. You know, he’d have meetings at
nine o’clock in the morning\! \laughs.\ Nine o’clock? You want me to
be dragged down to south San Jose at nine o’clock? You got to be
kidding\! \laughs\ I just didn’t fit in. I worked it out so that I
could be liaison between them and folks in Research, so that I could get
folks in Research working on some of the problems they were doing. But
then it turned out this group was going to be moving to Boulder. People
say it’s a nice city, but I wasn’t prepared to move to Boulder; my
family’s all here. I was offered another package, so I took it\!

### Becoming the President of the ACM

**Abbate:**

\laughs.\ So you got to retire twice from IBM\!

**Simons:**

I got to retire twice, yes.

I figured now was the time to become ACM President, and I ended up
running against another woman. If I’d run against another man, it would
have been a sure thing, because women almost always win, but I ran
against Mary Jane Irwin. But I won. I don’t know what I would have done
if I hadn’t won.

Meanwhile, I had started US-ACM.

**Abbate:**

So, was this concurrent with your ACM Presidency?

**Simons:**

No, no. This is way before, in ‘93\. John White was the President when I
was Secretary and was now the CEO-Executive Director of ACM. John knew I
was really interested in policy and everything, so we worked together on
this and decided to start a U.S. Public Policy Committee. We came up
with the name US-ACM; it’s actually U.S. Public Policy Committee. The
idea was to get ACM into the area of technology policy. It was a very
tricky thing to do politically. I mean, for all my horror stories of
IBM, you might think I’m a terrible politician, but actually within ACM
I’ve been a pretty good politician.

**Abbate:**

Like your dad?

**Simons:**

Well, I don’t know if I was as good as he was. I just didn’t fit into
IBM. But there was a real reluctance in ACM to get ACM doing policy,
because policy is awfully close to politics. In fact, I suppose you
could say that they’re maybe the same; maybe they’re not. People were
very skittish, and I can understand that, because if we had gone and
done something really stupid, it could have had a very bad reflection on
ACM. I also think—this is my own personal theory, which I can’t
verify—that there’s a lot of reluctance in many institutions like
professional societies to engage in something that looks political,
because of the repercussions that we’re still feeling from the McCarthy
era, because McCarthy went after the intelligentsia of the country.
Anyway, for whatever reasons, there was reluctance, and so we had to
tailor it very carefully. It started off small, and we were sort of
feeling our way.

Around the second half of ‘92, after I stopped being Secretary, I
started putting together the Committee. Again, in order to do this, you
want to get the right people initially. That’s very important. So I
called Dick Karp, my former thesis advisor, and he said Yes. He’s done
that for me several times, when I was trying to get something started. I
started a science policy committee in the Theory SIG of ACM, and he
helped me with that by saying Yes, and he helped me with some other
things. So I got Dick, and then I got some other prominent people; I got
several people who were well known in the community to agree to be on
this committee.

We sort of had to feel our way through. Early on, one of the things that
came up was suggesting a new person for the CISE position at NSF, and so
I sent out a note saying, “Can people come up with names?” But then it
was obvious that it’s easy to suggest people, \but not\ very easy to
say somebody shouldn’t do it. I mean, if it’s \an email\ list, people
aren’t going to do that. So I think that’s when we decided we needed an
Executive Committee. Or maybe we did it early on; I don’t recall. But
anyway, the Executive Committee had the President of ACM; the Executive
Director of ACM; I think we had a couple of representatives from the
SIGs; so we structured this thing so that a lot of the ACM leadership
would be closely linked to US-ACM, so that there were be this oversight.
Anyway, the Executive Committee then came up with a list via conference
call, because we couldn’t do it any other way. So that was one of the
first things we did.

But the first real thing we did was: shortly after U.S. ACM got off the
ground—we hadn’t done much yet—the Clipper Chip was announced. So I got
this idea that we should do a study. I also knew that Susan Landau, this
woman who had shown up at my house when the shit had hit the fan at IBM,
was in a difficult situation herself at U. Mass Amherst, where she was
at the time. She was also somebody who was very interested in policy and
who wrote well. I thought she’d be a fantastic person to be a staff
person for the study if we could get her, and she agreed to do it, even
though I think she was probably underpaid and she was overworked. And I
got Steve Kent, who is a big name in certain areas, to Chair it; and I
put together this committee—which was so balanced that they couldn’t
come up with any real recommendations, because I had Whit Diffie and
Dorothy Denning on it, and they were on opposite sides of the issue. If
you’ve heard of Diffie-Hellman \key exchange\: Whit’s well-known in
encryption. Public-key encryption, that was their invention.

Then we got NSF funding, and because Susan was so good and so dedicated,
they got the thing out in less than a year. It was aimed at the lay
reader, so it’s short. It may still be a bit too technical; I’m not
sure; but the goal was to produce something that staff members of
Congress could read, so they could understand the issues. And even
though they didn’t take a position, they did at least find problems and
state what the opposing positions were where they didn’t agree. In fact,
it became the basis of a subsequent National Academy study called the
Crisis Report, which came out in ‘96, where they actually did come out
with some recommendations. They had an eight hundred thousand–dollar
budget; we had a seventy thousand–dollar budget.

That was really a great way to get things started, because we had this
really good piece of work that was the sort of thing that I had had in
mind. There are all these political and policy decisions being made that
involve technology, where the people making the decisions don’t really
understand the issues, and it seemed to me that our goal as
technologists was to try to provide, as much as possible, unbiased
information (although we’d clearly have our own biases) that would
certainly explain how the technology works and what some of the
implications could be of various decisions.

**Abbate:**

A bit akin to what the National Academies do?

**Simons:**

Somewhat, although I would say it’s different. First of all, the
National Academies have more constraints. We take positions; we write
letters; we do stuff that the National Academies don’t do. If you go to
the Web page—in fact, I can send you a bunch of slides that I just got,
which are really nicely written by our Director in Washington, who is
great. He’s the former chief staffer for the Technology Subcommittees of
the House Science Committee, and he’s really superb. He’s only been
there for a year and a half and it’s really made a tremendous
difference.

### Details of ACM Activities

**Abbate:**

So you do take positions on some issues?

**Simons:**

We don’t lobby, though. We don’t lobby on legislation. But we’ve
certainly come out very strongly against the anti-circumvention and
anti-dissemination provisions of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act.
We’ve signed onto several amicus briefs. Most recently, we just signed
on to a brief written by Pam Samuelson. She’s a Law Professor up at
Berkeley. Half in Law School, half in SIMS \School of Information
Management and Systems\, which is a sort of interdisciplinary area. A
MacArthur Fellowship Award winner; you know, those “genius” awards.
She’s been very prominent and outspoken fighting some of what she
calls these “copyright maximalists.” She’s written for CACM, the ACM
major journal, but she’s also written for—what’s that flashy journal?

**Abbate:**

Wired?

**Simons:**

Yes, Wired. Anyway, she wrote a brief that was originally just going to
be signed by law professors, but she’s on US-ACM, and she and I were
talking about it, and I said, “Well, why don’t we get onto that too?”

There have been two interesting cases relating to DVDs. You know that
DVDs were encoded with this really crappy encryption called CSS. It’s
40-bit, and they didn’t even use a standard, well-known encryption
algorithm; they invented their own, and they depend on obfuscation, and
it’s really easily broken. I’m not a cryptographer, but it’s obvious.
And it was broken pretty early. In fact, it turns out that you don’t
even need to break it; if you want to get to the key, you just need to
know a number that tells you how far into something a particular key is.
Because the DVDs have to have the keys for all the different machines
that they play on, and you just have to know the—what’s the word?

**Abbate:**

The address of where your machine’s key is?

**Simons:**

Basically, yes. I mean, that’s how crappy it is.

Anyway, the code itself was broken, and the standard technique for
breaking it is called DeCSS. It was developed in Europe. There’s a guy
named Jon Johansen, who I think is under indictment in Norway, who was a
15- or 16-year-old kid when he posted it on his Web site. I think he
claimed to have broken it; I don’t know if he did or not, because I’ve
heard different stories about it. Anyway, it’s all over the Web. And
there are two cases involving this. One is a case in New York, which
you’ve maybe heard of: The 2600 case. There’s this guy named Eric
Corley, who has an e-zine called 2600; he lives in Stony Brook, I think.
He was chosen as a defendant by the movie industry because he’s a
wonderful defendant. I think he probably has “Fuck you” all over his Web
page. I’m not sure; I haven’t looked; but you know: “Up the
Establishment.” He wears scruffy tee shirts and his hair in a ponytail.
He’s the kind of person, you drag him into court, the Judge looks at him
and says, “Yuck\! I hope people like that stay away from my daughter\!”
So he was a well-chosen defendant. Anyway, he had posted this DeCSS on
his Web site, so it’s easy, so the movie industry went after him and a
couple of other defendants. The others just immediately complied with
everything, and so they got dropped, but he didn’t. He did take it off
his Web site, but he put up links to other places on the Web where it
exists.

I was actually deposed as an Expert Witness for his court case. I missed
the court case because we were in Europe on vacation; otherwise I would
have loved to have gone. He was found guilty under the Digital
Millennium Copyright Act \of 1998\. And that’s supposed to implement a
WIPO \World Intellectual Property Organization\ Copyright Treaty, but
it wasn’t even clear that we needed to do anything to implement it.
Anyway, it’s way overkill; it has much more than what the treaty has in
it. In particular, it has anti-circumvention and anti-dissemination
provisions. So basically, it’s illegal to circumvent copyright
protection mechanisms. It’s also illegal to make available tools for
circumventing. This has enormous implications for computer science,
which is why this is an area where the community is really \united\.
The positions we’ve taken have not been controversial at all. This is
where the community’s completely behind what we’re doing—which is nice,
although we’ve got some pretty formidable opponents.

Anyway, this guy posts this stuff, and he gets convicted, and he’s
enjoined from even having links on his Web site. Now, the San Jose
Mercury News has \the same\ links on their Web site; they said so in
court. It doesn’t matter. I wrote an article on this; it’s in the ACM
digital library: I give an address where you can find DeCSS in my
article, though it’s not a link; you actually have to copy it. But this
kid was convicted. Now, he appealed; he lost his initial appeal in the
Appeals Court. I think it was a group of three, and I think they may
have expanded to the full court, and that was lost too. And I just
really hope that he doesn’t take it to the Supreme Court, because he is
exactly the wrong person the we want to have as a defendant. I mean, the
movie industry is very smart about this.

Now, Felton would have been really good. You know about the Felton case?
Ed Felton is a Princeton Professor, but he was at Stanford last year. In
fact, he and I co-taught a course this past quarter. This is another
really interesting story. The SDMI (Secure Digital Music Initiative) and
the RIAA (Recording Industry Association of America) co-sponsored a
contest on the Net. They had these watermarking technologies, four of
them; they had four pieces watermarked; and the global contest was to
strip the watermarks off the music, such that the music still sounded
right. So Felton, who was at Princeton, and someone at Rice University—I
mean, these are faculty people—also a graduate student of Felton’s, and
someone who was at Xerox PARC: a group of people got together, and they
broke it. They submitted their solution, and sure enough, they’d broken
all four.

Now, in order to get the prize, you had to sign a statement giving your
intellectual property over to the people who ran the contest. They said,
“We’re not interested in the prize. We’re going to publish this.” This
was not what they \the contest organizers\ were expecting\! So they
submitted it to a workshop, and it was accepted. Two weeks before they
were supposed to present their paper, Ed, his co-authors, the Program
Committee Members, and all of their employers got threatening letters.
“If you present this paper, you’re going to be in violation of the
DMCA, the anti-dissemination provisions”—because they were going to talk
about how they broke it.

**Abbate:**

So it wouldn’t be illegal to do it that particular case, but it would be
illegal to talk about it, even in that particular case?

**Simons:**

Right. And there are other situations where that’s also true. I mean,
it’s a very Alice-in-Wonderland kind of law.

**Abbate:**

The whole principle seems wrong. It sounds like prior restraint or
something, because it sounds like it’s illegal to break the encryption
even if you’re not actually violating copyright. Suppose I circumvent
it, but I don’t actually . . .

**Simons:**

. . . make any illegal copies? Nobody has ever shown that anyone used
DeCSS to make illegal copies. If you want to make pirate copies of these
DVDs, you go off to Asia somewhere, you set up a factory; and you copy
the whole thing—encoded\! It’ll play in people’s DVD players anyway. I
think Corley probably has stuff on his Web site about “Oh, we can make
illegal copies”; he probably had incriminating stuff like that; but
\computer scientists have a different\ rationale for what we’re doing,
and I think it is a legitimate one. \For example, allowing DVDs to be
played on systems such as Linux that are not supported by the
industry.\ There was an organization that was formed to license people
to make \DVD players. In order to be licensed, I think you had to pay a
fee, and you also had to sign a non-disclosure agreement, because part
of what they were doing was trying to keep all this stuff secret. I’m
sure they knew it could be broken—I know they knew it could be broken,
because I know that there were scientists who told them it could be
broken. Now, if you think about Linux and the whole theory behind the
open software movement, signing a non-disclosure agreement is totally
contrary to the whole idea. Besides which, even if people \who wanted
to make Linux-compatible DVD players\ were willing to sign a
non-disclosure agreement, who’s qualified to do it? Who has the
authority? It’s not like a Microsoft or an IBM, where it’s clear who has
the authority. In these open-software movements, no one has the
authority. So the argument was, “Well, we have to break this so that we
can play DVDs—legally purchased DVDs—under Linux.” I think that’s
legitimate.

**Abbate:**

And to say you have to incorporate this copyright protection also
restricts how you can provide that technology . . .

**Simons:**

If you have to be licensed. But that’s the way they do it.

So anyway, Ed Felton and the group decided the day before they were
supposed to present their paper that they would withdraw it. Basically
what Ed told me was that he just didn’t feel comfortable subjecting such
a large group to potential financial problems—even though it’s pretty
clear, I think, to everybody that they would have won. I mean, you still
have to hire a lawyer, and it could be ugly. It’s very intimidating to
have somebody threaten to take you to court, especially if they’re very,
very powerful, and very, very wealthy. They’ve got a lot of money.

So they withdrew the paper, and then they resubmitted it to another
conference \the 10th USENIX Security Symposium\—and the recording
industry sued. So Ed and almost all the co-authors—I think one dropped
out—counter-sued the RIAA, SDMI, \U.S. Attorney General\ John
Ashcroft, and Verance Corporation on the grounds that what they were
trying to do was unconstitutional. While this was going on, somebody at
the RIAA wised up and said, “This was a really stupid move on our
part”—because when he withdrew the paper, there was a lot of press:
“Princeton Professor threatened with lawsuit.” And everybody around
here was very aware of it. I mean, it didn’t look good. He’s a Princeton
Professor. He’s not some punk kid with “Fuck you” on his Web site from
Stony Brook; he’s a Princeton Professor, with short hair, and it turns
out he speaks very well; he’s a very good public speaker, and he’s
smart. And the other people working with him are similar-status people.
So they realized they’d screwed up, and they immediately said, “No, no,
no\! We didn’t mean it. We’re not going to sue; we’re not going to do
anything. Do whatever you want\! It’s okay. We don’t care.” Meanwhile,
of course, he has this threatening letter posted on his Web site. It’s a
threat written by lawyers: it’s not explicit, it’s implicit. What
happened, which probably could have been predicted, was that the judge
threw the case out, because they weren’t being threatened. I think they
were able to negotiate something with the RIAA and SDMI that they
wouldn’t come after them for any version of this paper or anything,
whatever they did. They could make the movie out of it and they wouldn’t
come after them.

**Abbate:**

So that got published?

**Simons:**

Yes. ACM submitted a declaration, and this took a lot of work on my
part. I’ve learned a little bit about the law. A declaration is
different from an amicus brief. A declaration is something that says,
“We have a specific interest in this case,” and it usually goes in the
lower court, the first court; whereas an amicus is usually an opinion,
and it’s more often on appeals. The court has to look at a declaration;
it doesn’t have to look at an amicus. So a declaration, in some ways, is
\stronger\, but you have to say, “We have a specific interest in
what’s happening”—as opposed to, “We think this is a good idea to do
it this way, or a bad idea,” which an amicus would say. So ACM submitted
it, saying, “We have an upcoming workshop on digital rights
management”—which we did—”and we publish papers in this area, and
we’re going to be subject to some of the DMCA restrictions.” I thought
our declaration might make the difference, because even if Felton et al.
weren’t being threatened, we had to worry. We’re publishers, and we also
have a digital library; we have to worry about protecting ourselves,
too. Now, there isn’t as much incentive for people to \target us\, but
that’s a different issue. That was the first time the ACM has ever done
that, and that was a real struggle, because the President of ACM was a
bit nervous about doing something like that. He was afraid of that they
would come after us. And there was no way, legally, they could come
after us: none. They can’t come after us for submitting a declaration.

Now, this other case I started telling you about, that we just signed
onto an amicus on, is before the California Supreme Court. This is also
related to DVDs, but it’s not under the DMCA. There were some other
people who posted DeCSS on their Web sites, because it’s all over the
Web, and they were gone after by the DVD CCA \Digital Video Disc Copy
Control Association\, the trade group that’s licensing people to
manufacture DVDs. They went after some of these people on the grounds
that they were violating trade secrets.

**Abbate:**

Can you violate a trade secret if you haven’t agreed to keep it?

**Simons:**

That’s my question, too. But I think there are ways that people who
don’t actually sign the agreement can still be guilty of trade-secret
violations. I’m pretty sure that’s true. But this seems like a very
far-fetched case to me.

Apparently, in the lower court it was argued on a First Amendment basis.
First Amendment, and also that it’s not a trade secret; but apparently
what the lower court looked at was the First Amendment, and they said,
“This isn’t a First Amendment issue.” I think all that happened was
that the lower court issued an injunction mandating that DeCSS be
removed from these Web sites. That’s all that’s happened so far.

That injunction went to the Appeals Court. The Appeals Court overturned
the injunction on the grounds that code is speech, and therefore this is
prior restraint of speech. Now, they said a couple of interesting
things. They said source code is speech. Object code isn’t; object code
generated by a machine isn’t—which sort of gets back to my story of
working on the Varian 620i, because I could read that \object code\.
But anyway, an interesting question, just from a tactical perspective,
looking at all these wars that are going on with copyright, is: Would it
be sufficient if we could somehow get protection for source code and not
for object code? Would that be sufficient? As a tactical question. As a
computer scientist, it seems to me there’s a continuum from object to
source; there’s not a clear breaking point; but I guess you could define
“object code” for legal purposes as something which is produced by the
computers.

The case is now on appeal at the Supreme Court of California, and Pam
Samuelson wrote a brief arguing the trade secret issue, saying, “Let’s
focus on trade secrets. This is not a trade secret violation. There’s no
trade secret here.” But she also talked a bit about reverse engineering,
and we signed onto that brief, and I think that’s going to be released
tomorrow. So we’ll see. So, that’s the kind of thing we’re doing.

### Teaching at Stanford

**Abbate:**

And you’re also at Stanford now? Visiting or something?

**Simons:**

I’ve been a Consulting Professor at Stanford. Last year I taught a
course in Science, Technology, and Society, and this year I taught a
course in computer science. This year we tried doing something
different, so Ed and I tried doing what we’re calling a “clinic.” You
know about a law school clinics? You know what those are? I think they
started maybe as early as the seventies, with environmental clients, or
civil rights; areas like that. They would have hands-on work for the law
school students, and I think they would sometimes do background work,
looking up case law and so on, maybe sometimes help to provide a brief.
So my idea—and then I got Ed involved with this—was to see if we could
do something like that for computer science.

**Abbate:**

Policy studies?

**Simons:**

Yes. Right. It didn’t entirely work. For one thing, a quarter’s too
short. But we got three really good papers from students. They had to
produce a project, and three of them were very good. I’m going to be
working with some students getting their papers published; they’re
journal-quality papers. One was fascinating. It was an area I knew
nothing about: cyber-trespass. This guy actually wants to be a lawyer,
and I think he’ll turn out to be a good one. With a Master’s (or at
least an undergraduate degree) in computer science from Stanford and a
law degree, he’ll be dynamite. But he looked through this whole question
of “What is cyber-trespass?” He looked at the old trespass notions,
pre-computer, and how they try to take some really obscure notion of
trespass and apply it to computers. Breaking into someone’s system is
trespass. But what laws cover it?

Another one that is really interesting is deep linking; preventive
linking. When I put a link to someone else’s Web site, there are
different ways of doing it. There’s something called “framing,” where I
can put my own stuff around it; or I might just have a link to it, and
it might be clear that when I click on that link I’m going to someone
else’s Web site, or it might not be clear. There was just a case in the
Netherlands where some group that was linking to some newspaper articles
were found guilty of violating copyright or something and told not to do
it. I think it was a search engine. Which is very bizarre, in my
opinion. The newspapers were claiming, “This is our material. You can’t
publish it.” Well, they were linking to it; they weren’t publishing it.
But people aren’t clear as to what’s publishing and what isn’t.

**Abbate:**

I had heard about that issue of links, that some people had claimed that
was copying.

**Simons:**

Yes. And in some cases, it might be. I mean, she really struggled with
this. Her name is Laura Beck, and she really struggled with this: trying
to figure out where the line should be drawn. She really struggled with
it, and I think she came up with a pretty good paper.

\If you’re interested in policy issues,\ you ought to check our Web
site: www.acm.orgusacm. And as I said, Jeff Grove, the Director of our
Washington office, put together a really nice set of slides, talking
about what we’ve done. We’ve also done some work trying to prevent NIST
. . . NIST has an Office of Computer Security, or a group that does
computer security research, and Bush has been proposing to move that
into this new Homeland Security Department. Everybody’s saying this is a
terrible idea, because this is a group that does a lot of research;
they’re not doing homeland stuff.

**Abbate:**

They’re doing standards; it’s supposed to be open\!

**Simons:** Exactly. It’s supposed to be standards: precisely. They’re
supposed to be coming up with standards, and you don’t want this under
the Homeland Defense; it’s just a bad idea. It might be a good idea to
put some other group under there that really looks at cyber-security
issues. I do think that cyber-security is an issue. One of the best
things you could do about that is to get rid of Windows 98 and stuff
like that\! It is an issue, and some of the most rudimentary things are
not being done. I mean, we don’t even need anyone to do research; you
need to go around and make sure that everybody’s computer is set so that
you have to click on something before you open an attachment.

Have you heard of UCITA? Peter Neumann says he likes the Italian
pronunciation, which is “You cheata.” \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Peter Neumann edits the RISKS Digest.

**Simons:**

Yes. Peter’s also on US-ACM. In fact, he’s on the Executive Committee
now. We have involved a number of prominent people, and that’s one of
the things that’s important to do, to give it credibility.

There was a move, which I guess probably started four or five years ago
now. Commerce law is regulated at the state level. There’s something
called the Uniform Commercial Code. It exists so that if you’re doing
business in California and want to sell something in New York, you don’t
have to worry about what the law is in New York. It makes sense. And the
way new pieces of this code are developed is that there are these two
committees that get together: one is a group lawyers from the American
Law Institute, and the other is some sort of Commissioners for the
Uniform Commercial Code, or whatever; they’re all at the state level.
They get together, and they come up with a new proposal, and when they
agree on it, then it comes up as a Recommendation and goes off to the
states, and they pass it.

Article 2 \of the UCC\ is about contracts. Standard contract law
assumes that you’ve got two roughly equal entities that are negotiating
a contract. You and I could negotiate a contract, or Microsoft and Sun
could negotiate a contract, even though Microsoft is a lot bigger. But
now they we have these shrink-wrap licenses, which are a form of
contracts, and that’s a little different. So Article 2B was supposed to
have been an addition to the Uniform Commercial Code that would deal
with mass-market licenses. Well, Microsoft is the main push behind this,
and what they came up with is so horrible that the lawyers pulled out.
The worked on it for about three years, and the lawyers pulled out, and
we thought it was dead. But the Uniform Code Commissioners went ahead
with it, renamed it UCITA—Uniform Computer Information Transactions
Act—and it’s been passed by Virginia and Maryland. The schtick was
that this will bring in high-tech industry, which of course it hasn’t.

Now, the deal with UCITA, and before that Article 2B, is . . . Have you
ever read a shrink-wrap license? “We are not liable for anything.” And
then there are a number of other cute things that are in a number of
them. For example, there are anti-benchmarking clauses in a number of
them. That came about because Dave DeWitt, who was at the University of
Michigan some years back, did a benchmarking study of three different
commercial databases, I believe. He published the results, together with
the names of the databases, and one of them—I think it was Oracle;
anyway, whichever one got the worst—was really upset. So they started
saying—and Microsoft has this in their shrink-wrap licenses—“You cannot
publish articles about our product without getting our permission to do
so.”

**Abbate:**

What is the legal standing for doing this?

**Simons:**

Well, most of this stuff hasn’t been tested in the courts.

**Abbate:**

So there’s nothing about giving up your First Amendment rights just
because you bought a product.

**Simons:**

It hasn’t been tested in the courts—which is both good and bad.

Another one, which is on and off again in these various versions, is
something called Self Help. Talk about an Orwellian name\! “Self Help”
means that I, as the owner of the software—because remember, you just
license it; you don’t own it—I as the owner can remotely disconnect you,
or turn your software off, if I’ve decided that you’ve violated the
license. That’s Self Help. I think they may have to try to give you some
notice first, but whether or not you get it is another issue. Suppose
you’re away on vacation? And the whole liability thing is also very
interesting, because suppose they do this and they cause real damage.
Are they liable?

**Abbate:**

I’m surprised. To me, what’s striking is that they would have any way of
getting into your computer and messing with it.

**Simons:**

Oh, but there’s something that came out about Microsoft recently, where
there’s some kind of download patch they sent, and that patch includes
some provision that allows them to turn things off on your machine.

**Abbate:**

But for the software to decide you had violated the license and turn
itself off, it must have some capability for . . .

**Simons:**

Well, presumably something gets sent to it to say, “Turn it off.”

**Abbate:**

Yes. So it must have something where it’s going to take this incoming
message and respond to it, which sounds like the world’s biggest
security hole.

**Simons:**

Right. Tell me about it\! That’s the thing, you see. One of the
arguments I frequently make is that when you talk about security, let’s
look at UCITA, and let’s look at all these efforts to eliminate
reverse-engineering—which is really critical for finding viruses.
They’re \also\ very anti-consumer, to put it mildly, and a
significant number of State Attorneys General have written letters about
against 2B and probably against UCITA. One of the issues is that in
commerce law, apparently, if you buy a product, there are implied
licenses—the Magnussen-Moss Act—that a manufacturer cannot disclaim. So
there are implied warranties that they can’t walk away from, because
there are consumer protection laws that were written. And now all the
software manufacturers are saying, “Well, you’re not buying anything.
You’re just buying a license, not a product, so it’s not covered.”

**Abbate:**

So why can’t everyone say that? Why can’t General Motors say, “This is
just a license?”

**Simons:**

Well, there’s an hysterical email with a UCITA warranty for a car. It’s
very funny\!

**Abbate:**

What does that even mean? Are they are saying software’s not physical?

**Simons:**

I think the very fact that they’re saying “It’s just a license” is a
fundamental problem. A little over a hundred years ago, there was an
interesting case that went to the Supreme Court, where book
manufacturers were putting licenses into books saying, “If you resell
this book, you have to resell it for the same price that you purchased
it for.” Of course, the goal was to eliminate the used-book market. The
Supreme Court declared it unconstitutional. And we see how licenses are
being used to get around all kinds of protections and legal liabilities.

It’s a tricky business, because we know you can’t write flawless,
bug-free software; it’s impossible for anyone to program; so you can’t
expect software manufacturers to be liable for any little thing that
goes wrong. On the other hand, if they’re not held liable for anything,
then there’s no incentive for them to try to produce robust, secure
software—especially if they have a monopoly.

Maybe your next book will be on policy\! I should probably try to write
a book, because that’s one way of getting the status: to write a book.
Also, the issues are so important. Last year, before I started teaching
privacy, I asked my students what they think should be the privacy
policy. These are a bunch of kids who are taking a policy class, so
they’re already interested in the subject. And mostly what they said
basically amounted to “notice and choice.” Notice and choice means, I
tell you what I’m going to do with your information, and you can either
participate or not. That’s all the P3P \Platform for Privacy
Preferences Project\ does; it gives you notice and choice.

**Abbate:**

Did I ask if you had mentors, or role models?

**Simons:**

Mike Sipser, the graduate student whom I lived with, was in many ways
that for me. It’s sort of funny thinking of him as a mentor, because he
was a graduate student; but he was very good.

### Changes in Computer Science for Minorities

**Abbate:**

In terms of how the field of computing has changed since you got
involved, which I guess was thirty years ago . . .

**Simons:**

Yes. Well, Intro CS I took in ‘71\.

**Abbate:**

What are some of the most striking changes from your perspective?

**Simons:**

There are several. One is, it certainly has developed a lot more. As I
say, when I started off, it was pretty shallow: broad and shallow. It’s
still pretty broad, but it’s a little bit deeper, at least in some
places\! In some places, it’s still pretty shallow. There are a lot of
con artists in this field.

**Abbate:**

Hmm\!

**Simons:**

Oh, yes. People pushing the latest super-duper whatever. There are fads;
things go in and out fashion. And I’ve also noticed that the wheel is
frequently rediscovered over and over again; as different models of
computing come up, people rediscover the same thing—which is a sad
reflection, really, on the scholarliness of the field, that we don’t
know our own history.

The status has changed remarkably, of course. When I first started,
there was no problem getting into computer science. I mean, admittedly I
knew the President of the university, but it wasn’t as if there were not
enough seats in the classroom.

Oh, I didn’t tell you about the Re-entry Program. Did Paula tell you
about that? At Berkeley. Paula, Sheila, and I started the Re-entry
Program for women and minorities in computer science at Berkeley.

**Abbate:**

I think she talked about the Re-entry Program.

**Simons:**

And did she tell you about how we had this wonderful lunch for the
faculty when we were trying to convince them? We had both graduated at
this point, and we were still both local, and we were still plotting, so
we started this Re-entry Program; because at that point in the early
‘80s, seats were at a premium, and doors were closing. I had this
really bizarre history, as you can see, and part of \my ability to get
into the field\ was that I knew, from having been married to an
academic, that any rule could be broken, and that’s a very valuable
lesson that most women don’t have. But part of it was that there weren’t
that many \obstacles\. I mean, there were obstacles, obviously, but
there were ways for an oddball like me to get in; and in the early
eighties that changed.

In fact, one of the first things that Berkeley did when there was a real
crunch—too many people wanting to take classes—was that they eliminated
the Extension School students. When I first went to Berkeley, I was
allowed to take courses through the Extension School before I became a
graduate student, and it was something I always encouraged other women
to do, if they were thinking about going back to school or maybe going
into computer science. You could sign up for a regular CS course through
the Extension School, which was a nice side way to get into learning the
stuff. That was closed, and Paula and I were both feeling that they were
basically making it so only mainstream people could go, and women are
more likely to be non-mainstream.

**Abbate:**

“Mainstream” being what men do.

**Simons:**

Certainly both of us were non-mainstream, and a lot of the other women
we knew were, too. There are more mainstream women now in the field, but
in those days, especially, there weren’t that many. And we also felt
that the field was still broad enough that there were ways that you
could come into it without having a strong computer science background.
You know: get the background and do something interesting.

So the way we sold it to the faculty was, we actually had a lunch we
bought: she and I paid for sandwiches and wine, and we fed them\!

**Abbate:**

\laughs.\ That was enough?

**Simons:**

Well, it wasn’t the only thing, but it helped a lot\! \laughs.\ And we
promised them money. We got money raised. Sheila Humphreys was the
person who was responsible. In fact, she was the first Director. So we
were able to guarantee seats in the classrooms for people, but we raised
money for the department. The neat thing about it was that when the
Re-entry Program was going really well, it was presented as the
Department’s program; they took it on. Then, of course, it was killed by
Prop 209; and nobody fought to save it, which really pissed me off.

**Abbate:**

Do you think computer science has become more open to women since then?
Or less, in some ways? Or the same?

**Simons:**

In the early days, it was very open to women, because it didn’t have any
status or stature; so it was okay for women to do it. As it has become
more high-status, high-paying, high-stature, I think it has become
closed to women. And I don’t think that’s unique to computer science. I
was talking to a woman in a different field, who said the same thing had
happened in her area: when it was new and ill-defined, a bit amorphous,
\it was more open to women\.

**Abbate:**

And low-paid?

**Simons:**

Yes, exactly. Well, the reverse is happening now with physicians, right?
There are more women in medicine, and physicians are making less money
and have less status.

**Abbate:**

Do you find that women end up in certain areas of computing?

**Simons:**

Yes. Much more likely in software than hardware. I think there are a
fair number of women in theory, relatively speaking; not a lot, because
there aren’t a lot in anything. Certainly many more in human factors.
Human factors is one of the few areas which is almost dominated by
women. Ben Shneiderman’s area. But the more the field appears kind of
“soft”, as opposed to engineering, it’s more likely to have women. I
think part of it is this whole math thing, and part is the social view
of what women do. I mean, areas that women work in, like human factors .
. . A lot of women, for example, write manuals; they’re technical
writers. Well, again, that’s a low-status, low-pay job—even though we
sure as hell could use better-written manuals.

**Abbate:**

Yes\!

**Simons:**

That was one of the main reasons we started the Re-entry Program. We
wanted women coming out with advanced degrees from Berkeley, from the
top schools. Again, if you look at where the women are in school,
they’re more likely to be at the lesser schools, I believe. Although
CMU is doing a very good job with women. You know about that, I assume?

**Abbate:**

Right\! Well, I read the study that just came out this year. Unlocking
the Clubhouse:

Women in Computing. Something like that.

**Simons:**

But of course, CMU is a lot smaller than Berkeley.

**Abbate:**

It sounds like it’s still pretty tough for women at CMU, at least from
what their study says.

**Simons:**

Oh, really? Even their study says it’s tough?

**Abbate:**

Well, it sounds like the environment was not that friendly, and I guess
they have done a lot to counteract what was kind of a hostile situation
to begin with. It’s interesting reading.

Well, what do you find most satisfying about your work with computing?

**Simons:**

Well, I’m not doing research right now, but when I did do research:
figuring out how something worked. Getting the theorems—because I mainly
wrote theorems, though not exclusively. Getting a thing to finally work;
getting the pieces together. When I finally figured out how to solve
this problem that was my thesis problem: Wow\! It was just marvelous.
There’s an excitement when you feel you’re making a breakthrough with
some problem you’ve really banged your head against and wrestled with. I
have this image of my wrestling this problem, and it was trying to hide
its secrets from me, and I knew they were there, somewhere; you just had
to somehow get to them\! So yes, that was pretty neat.

The policy work is different. In some ways it doesn’t have the depth
that doing research can have, when you’re really struggling with
understanding something. On the other hand, it’s so important, and we’re
at such a critical time right now, when these laws are being passed and
decisions are being made that have long-term impact. And it’s very
interesting. I think there are more important issues in the world than
what I work on, but this is what I have the credentials to do, so this
is where I can have the most impact.

### Final Thoughts

**Abbate:**

Do you have any advice for young women who might be thinking about going
into computing?

**Simons:**

It’s hard for me to advise women to go into computing. I have a hard
time, because I have such mixed feelings about it now. I’m on the Board
of MathScience Network, which means I’m working on trying to help get
women into math and science, and I’ve certainly put a lot of my own time
and energy into it. But . . .

One of the things we haven’t talked about is the whole issue of
surveillance.

**Abbate:**

I’m not sure what you mean.

**Simons:**

Well, it’s the fact that everything you do on the Net can be surveilled.
You know about Carnivore. All the databases that have been accumulated
about you by private entities and certain government agencies, and the
ease with which these things can be matched, drawn together. As more and
more of our life moves onto computers and the Net, more and more of what
we do is going to be exposed. I’m very concerned that we’re moving to a
surveillance society, and I think this has only been exacerbated by
what’s happened since September 11th \2001\.

**Abbate:**

Do you think that’s a problem that particularly affects women?

**Simons:**

No.

**Abbate:**

Or do you just mean in general?

**Simons:**

Yes. It’s not that I have trouble advising women to go into computing;
\it’s anyone\. It’s interesting: some of my students now are planning
to study law, the ones who took the policy course. These are all kids
out of computer science. In fact, I’m going to be meeting with one who
was working at Microsoft; I’m not quite sure what he’s going to do. He’s
thinking about going back to school and studying law. I’m pretty
encouraging, because I think what we really need are people who have
this technical background and a legal background, who can understand
these issues. Now, of course, one of the problems is that there aren’t
that many jobs for people like that, of the kind that these kids would
like to have, because they’re pretty idealistic; and the ones that there
are that are pretty low-paying; they tend to be with public interest
groups. Or possibly professional societies, maybe; but we \at ACM\
don’t have a lawyer on the staff—I mean, doing this kind of work. So
more likely they’d end up working in some corporate environment, which
might not be what they want.

So, it’s hard. It’s hard to advise people. But even if they’re going to
be working in the corporate environment, it’s still probably useful for
them to have a good understanding of technology, so that they can at
least explain to people what the implications of various decisions might
be. I don’t know. I mean, when I originally went into computing, one of
my ideas, aside from the fact that I could earn a living, was: back
then, you were starting to get punch-cards in with bills. I found this a
little bit creepy, so I thought, “Well, if I learn about computer
science, I’ll know how to deal with all this stuff.” And of course, what
I learned was that you can’t deal with it—that there’s no way you can
guarantee that information’s been deleted; it could just have been sent
off somewhere else. As I say, I really worry that we’re turning into a
surveillance society, and that’s very disturbing. I mean, the political
implications are enormous.

The other thing is, Americans are brainwashed about privacy. That’s what
I was starting to say earlier, \when I talked about my students’ views
on privacy policy\.

**Abbate:**

You mean, Americans are brainwashed to not expect much privacy?

**Simons:**

Yes. The very fact that my students said “notice and choice.” They
didn’t say, “They should be responsible \for protecting out
privacy\.” And these are my students\! I mean, they just hadn’t thought
about it. They’d heard “notice and choice,” and that’s all they’d heard.
Nobody talked about fair information practices. By the end of the
course, they all knew all about it. In fact, one of the kids came up to
me and he said, “Professor Simons, I really enjoy your class, but every
time I come here, I get more and more scared.”

**Abbate:**

Well, thank you for talking with me at such great length\!

**Simons:**

Well, thank you for listening to me\! I enjoyed it.

Retrieved from
"<http:/ethw.org/index.php?title=Oral-History:Barbara_Simons&oldid=120962>"

Categories(Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* Computer
  applications(Category:Computer_applications "Category:Computer applications")
* Computer aided
  engineering(Category:Computer_aided_engineering "Category:Computer aided engineering")
* Computer
  science(Category:Computer_science "Category:Computer science")
* Programming(Category:Programming "Category:Programming")
* Programming
  environments(Category:Programming_environments "Category:Programming environments")
* Educational
  institutions(Category:Educational_institutions "Category:Educational institutions")
* Law &
  government(Category:Law_%26_government "Category:Law & government")
* Patents(Category:Patents "Category:Patents")
* Surveillance(Category:Surveillance "Category:Surveillance")
* Systems engineering and
  theory(Category:Systems_engineering_and_theory "Category:Systems engineering and theory")

## Contents

* 1 About Barbara Simons(#About_Barbara_Simons)
* 2 About the Interview(#About_the_Interview)
* 3 Copyright Statement(#Copyright_Statement)
* 4 Interview(#Interview)
  * 4\.1 Family and Early Life(#Family_and_Early_Life)
  * 4\.2 Math in High School(#Math_in_High_School)
  * 4\.3 Meeting and Marrying James Harris
    Simons(#Meeting_and_Marrying_James_Harris_Simons)
  * 4\.4 Following her Husband(#Following_her_Husband)
  * 4\.5 Beginning a Career as a
    Programmer(#Beginning_a_Career_as_a_Programmer)
  * 4\.6 Getting her Ph.D.(#Getting_her_Ph.D.)
  * 4\.7 Berkeley Years(#Berkeley_Years)
  * 4\.8 Organizing Women(#Organizing_Women)
  * 4\.9 Ph.D. Research Subject(#Ph.D._Research_Subject)
  * 4\.10 Starting at IBM(#Starting_at_IBM)
  * 4\.11 Problems at IBM(#Problems_at_IBM)
  * 4\.12 Continuing Problems at IBM(#Continuing_Problems_at_IBM)
  * 4\.13 Taking a Package to Leave
    IBM(#Taking_a_Package_to_Leave_IBM)
  * 4\.14 Continuing at IBM(#Continuing_at_IBM)
  * 4\.15 Becoming the President of the
    ACM(#Becoming_the_President_of_the_ACM)
  * 4\.16 Details of ACM Activities(#Details_of_ACM_Activities)
  * 4\.17 Teaching at Stanford(#Teaching_at_Stanford)
  * 4\.18 Changes in Computer Science for
    Minorities(#Changes_in_Computer_Science_for_Minorities)
  * 4\.19 Final Thoughts(#Final_Thoughts)

![Powered by
MediaWiki(resources/assets/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)](//www.mediawiki.org/)
![Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki(extensions/SemanticMediaWiki/includes/../resources/images/smw_button.png)](https://www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 27 October 2015, at 07:05\.

* This page has been accessed 4,393 times.

* About ETHW(ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* Policies and disclaimers(ETHW:Policies "ETHW:Policies")

