Toggle navigation   

ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki(Main_Page)

* ** Go ****()
  * Browse by Subject(ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * Encyclopedia(Encyclopedia)
  
  * Oral Histories(Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * First Hand Histories(First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * LandmarksMilestones(Landmarks)
  
  * Archives(Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * Education(ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * Random page(Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * Help(Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * Contact us(Special:Contact)
  
  * 
  * Recent changes(Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * New pages(Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* ** Actions ****()
  * View
    source(index.php?title=Oral-History:Pat_Stewart&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source e")
  
  * History(index.php?title=Oral-History:Pat_Stewart&action=history "Past revisions of this page h")
  
  * 
  * Oral-History(Oral-History:Pat_Stewart)
  
  * Discussion(index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Pat_Stewart&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page t")
  
  * 
* ** Tools ****()
  * What links
    here(Special:WhatLinksHereOral-History:Pat_Stewart "A list of all wiki pages that link here j")
  
  * Related
    changes(Special:RecentChangesLinkedOral-History:Pat_Stewart "Recent changes in pages linked from this page k")
  
  * Special
    pages(Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages q")
  
  * Printable
    version(index.php?title=Oral-History:Pat_Stewart&printable=yes "Printable version of this page p")
  
  * Permanent
    link(index.php?title=Oral-History:Pat_Stewart&oldid=108652 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * Page
    information(index.php?title=Oral-History:Pat_Stewart&action=info)
  
  * Browse properties(Special:BrowseOral-2DHistory:Pat_Stewart)
* ** Account ****(# "Account")
  * Log
    in(index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3APat+Stewart)
  
  * 
  * Request account(Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Pat Stewart

## About Pat Stewart

Pat Stewart retired in 2008 after 26 years of working at Cambridge
University’s Computing Service Department. Previously, she worked at the
Institute of Astronomers and Barclay’s Bank. It was at Barclay’s where
she first worked with computers helping the bank transition to the
decimal system in Great Britain.

This interview is a comprehensive conversation about her experiences
with computers throughout her life, both personal and professional. It
begins with a discussion of her childhood and early education. It
transitions to her first job at Barclay’s and continues to her move to
Cambridge. After a brief interlude of working at the Institute of
Astronomers, she began to work at Cambridge University in the Computer
Service Departments. While there she developed university regulations
and taught computer courses to the faculty.

## About the Interview

PAT STEWART: An interview conducted by Janet Abbate for the IEEE History
Center, April 11, 2001\.

Interview \#631 Interview with Pat Stewart for the IEEE History, The
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc.

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
the IEEE History Center Oral History Program, IEEE History Center at
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ
07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include identification of
the specific passages to be quoted, anticipated use of the passages, and
identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Pat Stewart: an oral history conducted in 2001 by Janet Abbate, IEEE
History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

## Interview

INTERVIEW: Pat Stewart\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: April 11, 2001\
PLACE: Pat Stewart’s office at Cambridge University

### Family and Early Education

**Abbate:**

So to start, can you tell me when and where you were born?

**Stewart:**

Yes, I was born in Manchester (where you’re going to later) in 1948\.

**Abbate:**

And you grew up in Manchester?

**Stewart:**

Yes. Yes, I was there until I went to the University in London at the
age of 18\.

**Abbate:**

What did your parents do?

**Stewart:**

My father was a lacrosse stick maker \laughs\, which is a very unusual
occupation. There’s only one company in England that does it, and that’s
in Manchester, a very small firm. And my mother was an account’s clerk.

**Abbate:**

Did you have brothers and sisters?

**Stewart:**

No.

**Abbate:**

What kind of a . . . what sort of grammar school or . . . ?

**Stewart:**

It was a family school, yes. It was a convent grammar school.

**Abbate:**

So it was all girls then?

**Stewart:**

That’s right, yes. It was a \word unclear\ Direct Grant grammar
school; they were quite common. They direct grant opts out of the main
state system, mainly for denominational reasons, so that basically the
local authority pays to the school for your fees.

**Abbate:**

Does it have the same curriculum, basically?

**Stewart:**

Yes. Yes. More or less.

**Abbate:**

And were you interested in maths or science at an early age?

**Stewart:**

Maths, yes. Yes. Science as well, but it was really only when I went to
grammar school that I knew anything about science at all. I went to a
school in a class of over fifty students until I was eleven, and that
was really just the basics. We had then the Eleven Plus, which is your
qualifications to get into grammar school—I’m sure you’re well aware of
the British system—and I was one of only two people who passed in that
class, Eleven Plus; it was not a privileged sort of area or privileged
sort of education, so obviously I somehow managed to scramble through.
And when I went to grammar school I suddenly discovered that I was
rather good at maths, and that really just steered me from then on, and
science went with that.

**Abbate:**

So you took the A Levels in math and science?

**Stewart:**

That’s right, yes; maths and physics. And then went to Westville College
in London after that, but I didn’t finish my degree. I wasn’t getting on
very well at all, and I decided to call it a day. I lost my nerve, I
think, for exams at some point.

### Barclay’s Bank and First Computer

**Abbate:**

Hmm.

**Stewart:**

I had a summer job working for Barclay’s Bank in London, and so I said,
“Oh, any ideas for permanent jobs for me here?” And they said, “Oh
yes, we’ll send you off to Management Services, and maybe you can go
into the computing section.”

**Abbate:**

Now, when did you first encounter a computer?

**Stewart:**

I was aware of them . . . I must have been aware of them; I was aware of
them even when I was at home, but my first exposure was when I was
actually working with them, when I started to train as a programmer.

**Abbate:**

So they sent you off to training and that’s the first time . . .

**Stewart:**

Yes. Some of my fellow students who were doing more physics-based
courses were using computers as undergraduates, but as most of my degree
was maths, I didn’t actually come into contact with one at all. So I
knew what one was, and I knew what programming was, but I’d never
actually laid a finger on one.

**Abbate:**

Did you want to? When they said they could train you for this?

**Stewart:**

Well yes, that was sort of the area that I was thinking of going into.
Why, I don’t know; it just seemed a suitable sort of occupation for my
interests.

**Abbate:**

And this would have been the late ‘60s?

**Stewart:**

Yes, that was ‘69\. And I thought, “Well, I might as well give it a
whirl, see how it goes,” and in fact quite enjoyed it. I was at
Barclay’s for a year. I was trained on an NCR 315, which was using a
language called NEAT. I’m not sure whether you came across it at all.

**Abbate:**

I’m not sure. Was that like an assembler type of language?

**Stewart:**

Yes, it’s an assembly level language.

The NCR 315 was an old machine, even at that stage. I was working in the
Martin’s Bank programming team. Barclay’s—which is a very large bank, of
course, and was then—had just taken over Martin’s bank, which was a
small Liverpool-based bank; so I was working on that program team,
before it became assimilated into the main part of Barclay’s. And that
was quite a good experience, because working at the assembler level, at
that stage, was a good training, I felt.

**Abbate:**

What were you doing for them?

**Stewart:**

It was mostly maintenance on their suite of programs; they were keeping
things running; and it was decimalization conversion as well, because
that’s just before Britain went decimal. So we were working on the
decimalization programs.

**Abbate:**

Of the currency, you mean?

**Stewart:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

I never thought about that.

**Stewart:**

\laughs.\ Yes, yes the banks had to do quite a lot of work in that
area.

**Abbate:**

It sounds almost like the Y2K thing, where you need to convert
everything.

**Stewart:**

Yeah. Yes. It was pretty much that sort of major event that was coming
up. We knew exactly what we were working for; we knew exactly what we
had to do.

**Abbate:**

What was the deadline?

**Stewart:**

It was something like February, 1971, I think, if I remember correctly.
There was . . . there was a date at which we moved straight across to
decimal.

**Abbate:**

I mean, the whole country?

**Stewart:**

Yes. So we were working toward a particular date. \laughs.\ Quite
exciting\!

**Abbate:**

Had your parents told you that you would need to earn a living, or had
you always expected that you would need to . . . ?

**Stewart:**

Oh, absolutely expected. No question of it. Yes. As soon as I was 15 and
able to work, I did have a little job occasionally in the summer, but
certainly when I was at University it was expected that I would work in
the holidays—rather too much, because then I didn’t really have time to
do any catching up work that I might; it would have helped me to have
more time. But yes, money was tight, and my mother always worked, from
when I was five; so of course I expected to work. Yes, it wasn’t
\laughs\ anywhere where you didn’t expect to be earning your own
living\!

**Abbate:**

But you didn’t have anything particular in mind?

**Stewart:**

No, I always knew it would be something scientific, but I had no clear
plan. I mean, I can remember looking in the local paper and
seeing—computer operator, probably, or it may have been programmer—but
I know it said “computer,” and that interested me, but I didn’t know
what it was. I had no clear idea of what I was going towards. So I just
fell into it, really—as so many people do. \laughs.\

### Marriage and Moving to Cambridge

**Abbate:** So you worked at Barclay’s for just a year?

**Stewart:**

That’s right, yes. I was married at the end of the year, and my husband
came to be a research student in Cambridge so we moved here.

**Abbate:**

What was his field?

**Stewart:**

Radio astronomy.

**Abbate:**

Did he do any computing with that?

**Stewart:**

Yes. Yes, he still computes. He’s an accountant now, but he still
computes. \laughs\. Yes. Yes, he was a physicist at college and so was
using computers as a practical tool. I learned quite a lot of background
from him, what he was doing in that time.

**Abbate:**

So what happened after you moved to Cambridge?

**Stewart:**

Well, when I moved to Cambridge, I went to work for one of the early
startup research and development companies in Cambridge, which was
Cambridge Consultants. They were doing R\&D, and the reason I fell into
that job was because they were doing R\&D for Barclay’s, who were having
some problems with one of their computers which was next to a Tube line.
It was a Burroughs computer, and Burroughs was saying it was the
environment and the building that was causing the problem, and the
people who built the building said No, no, it was the computer that was
the problem. And so . . . \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

What was the problem again?

**Stewart:**

Vibration. There was some vibration that was causing some amount of
problem to the operation of the machine. And so Cambridge Consultants
were going about monitoring the building, monitoring the Tubes, et
cetera, and trying to work out whose fault it was. I forget the outcome
now \laughs\, maybe it wasn’t that important.

I didn’t enjoy that job at all. I’d just moved to Cambridge, it was very
isolated in 1970, you couldn’t easily move around: two hours to London;
if you wanted to get to Manchester it was all day on the train. We
didn’t have a car. Cambridge Consultants was about six miles out of
Cambridge; there was no transport. And I think they hadn’t had a
programmer in there before. I think they had just decided to employ me
because they brought in a new member of staff who said, “We must have a
programmer,” and there wasn’t really any work for me, so I didn’t enjoy
it at all. I did a little bit of work . . . what was I working on? There
was no computer in-house; we were using a very early dial-up service to
a PDP. So I went on a FORTRAN(FORTRAN "FORTRAN") course, to learn
FORTRAN, which of course being a scientific sort of firm was what they
were using; and I was dialing up, obviously in a very primitive way, to
a large PDP time-share.

**Abbate:**

This was 300 baud or something? \laughs.\

**Stewart:**

Oh no, it would be 110\! \laughs.\ If that\!

I forget what project I was working on. Whatever I was doing then, that
finished, and I was working on a project concerning Amoco and the
offshore gas platforms. They were wanting some work done on their PDP
systems. That was running on an assembler language, so it was picking up
an assembler language and working out what was going on with programs.
Again, I can’t remember the details now of what we did with that, other
than that it was in East Anglia; I had to go out there a couple of
times. I eventually left there. I’d just had enough in the end.

### Working at the Institute of Astronomers

**Abbate:**

How long were you there?

**Stewart:**

A year. Yes. So I just gave up the job because I just couldn’t bear it
any longer \laughs\, and I looked for a job in the University. And
there were not many programming jobs in Cambridge around at that
time—not for a pure programmer, certainly, with very little
experience; a little bit of commercial, and a bit of low-level
experience—and I couldn’t find very much. So I went to work for the
Institute of Astronomers in the observatories.

Originally, I was just measuring photographic plates, but they soon
realized that they had a programmer here, and they had programming work
to be done, and maybe I should be using my skills as a programmer. And
so I basically invented my own job—obviously with the department’s
help—and I became a programmer in the department, working on various
projects concerned with astronomy. I was there three years. Originally
we were using the University computer, which was then Titan; if you’ve
been talking to Karen \Spärk-Jones\ you will have heard all about
Titan, I’m sure. The IBM 370 was the first real computer the Computing
Service had—the Computing Service started in 1970\. It was the first one
that they really had of their own, building a user service on, and so I
was in the University at the time that came online, and I started
working on that machine, moving programs across from Titan onto the
370\.

**Abbate:**

Were you using FORTRAN on the 370?

**Stewart:**

Yes, FORTRAN at that point, yes.

**Abbate:**

And something else on the Titan?

**Stewart:**

Yes, it was Autocode on the Titan. That’s right. Yes. I was doing some
translation of programs. Thank you for reminding of that, I’d forgotten.

**Abbate:**

I suspected you . . .

**Stewart:**

Yes, I was reading Autocode and writing FORTRAN.

Yes, I was working on various projects in the Institute, and after we’d
done the conversion I was developing other programs with various other
mapping projects. I think one of the projects was: you’re taking the
radio sources and the optical sources and trying to get some match
between them, and seeing what you were seeing—so you would have a radio
source, take a photograph of it, and see the shape of the image.

**Abbate:**

That sounds quite interesting. So, were you doing sort of creative work,
figuring out what could be done computationally for the astronomers?

**Stewart:**

\In terms of astronomy,\ no; computationally, yes. They would tell me
what it was they wanted to do, because I have no astronomy background at
all, so they’d have to present me with the problem, and then it would be
creative work from then on devising the programs. Very often you were
looking for information from the tape libraries of astronomical
information—I can’t remember the name of it offhand. It was a U.S.
archive of stars. A large catalogue. Well, it was based somewhere around
Washington, but it was the big archive, anyway. And this came on ten
tapes, for example, and so you were winding down these tapes very, very
slowly, looking for whatever you were looking for. And I basically
copied the tapes and restructured them so you could find it very much
more quickly, in relation to the photographic plates that you had.

**Abbate:**

So you made sort of a database?

**Stewart:**

Yeah. Yes, a primitive sort of database, to find the data much more
quickly. And that worked quite nicely.

When the IBM was coming up, I was working down here \in the computer
lab\ quite a lot; because at that time, of course, it was all card and
paper, and the office was two miles away, \so I\ just spent all my
time on my bike going up and down—you couldn’t do a great deal just
sitting in an office. \laughs\

### Developing a Career in Computer Services

**Abbate:**

The astronomy office was two miles away?

**Stewart:**

That’s right, yes. So I spent quite a lot of time down here, and became
reasonably knowledgeable about the system, and the Computing Service
used to have a series of programming advisors to help users use the
system. And I became a programming advisor while I was also at
astronomy, helping people out with my knowledge of the system. And from
that I then joined the computer lab after three years, in the user
support area—User Services, as it was then—and that was in 1974\.

I was then working on documentation some, as much user support as we did
in those days: so we still had the programming advisors, but the
permanent staff were backing up the programming advisors. I would say
basically user support and documentation.

**Abbate:**

Documentation of what?

**Stewart:**

The system that we were running at the time. Because the IBM 370 was
running a lot of our own utilities.

**Abbate:**

Oh.

**Stewart:**

And basically we wrote the operating system—it was our own system,
called Phoenix, which ran over TSO. You could get rather more material
through a job scheduler, get rather more work through, and then they
provided the online system, which ran over the top—this was all fairly
early days—providing the help systems and messaging systems. From the
start they were providing a rather more friendly service than you get on
a basic IBM, \laughs\ I think you would hear. A succinct way of saying
it. \laughs.\

I did that for two years or so; I joined in October ‘74, and I actually
left in January ‘77, February ‘77, which is after my first child was
born. And during that time I’d written a number of manuals, particularly
thick manuals. We also ran at that time an external service for other
universities in the country. When the UK universities moved into
computing in a big way, with a lot of government backing, most
universities had British-built machines: ICLs. And only two
universities, if I remember correctly, had IBMs: that was Newcastle and
us. And part of our remit was to provide not only a service to other
universities in this region—so East Anglia, and so on—but also to
provide an IBM service to other universities in the country, if it was
needed. So we had a number of people from all over the country who
needed support, using packages like SPSS, for example, running on the
IBM systems. So I got to know some of these other people, and I said to
one of them, did he need any freelance programming–type assistance, as I
was going to be leaving Computing Service and had a baby; I’d be working
at home, but I would like some work to keep me going. He was a
geneticist at Birmingham. He jumped at the chance. I was thinking that,
originally, a few hours a week or something; and he said, “Oh, I’ll get
you a half-time contract\!” \laughs.\ And in my naiveté I said, “Yes,
OK”—\laughs\ not knowing what having a small baby was going to be
like\!

**Abbate:**

Now, these other universities, how did they access the IBM? Were they
dialing up, or sending people over?

**Stewart:**

They would send people over. I’m just trying to remember. Yes, we did
have some sort of dial-up for remote universities, so they would submit
their jobs and collect their output, and then log in again another
twelve hours later and clear the output from the job they’d just
submitted, et cetera. So they’d have the remote job entry sort of
terminals. I don’t believe that we had very much in the way of dial-up.
There might have been one or two people dialing up, but mostly I think
they were doing the remote job entry method of submitting their jobs. It
was very batch oriented at that time. The online system was certainly in
its infancy. VDUs had only just hit—mostly it was teletypes.

**Abbate:**

And this was . . . ?

**Stewart:**

‘76, ‘77\. Mostly they were teletypes. We did have some VDUs in the lab,
but they were quite expensive. You know, they were beginning to come in,
but not as many around as you would have expected only a couple of years
later.

**Abbate:**

Right.

**Stewart:**

So when I first started work at home, which was in August ‘77, I had a
teletype to begin with, and then I had a VDU shortly after that—we were
just waiting for it to be delivered—and an acoustic coupler. Not even a
modem \laughs\—an acoustic coupler\! And this acoustic coupler worked
at 110 baud, so it was pretty slow going, which is why I can’t think
that many people were dialing up before that. They must have been doing
job entry, I think. We may have even have had some fixed lines to
somewhere like East Anglia; I think we probably did. Sorry I don’t
remember the details \laughs\; it was a long time ago\!

I think one the attractions for the person I worked for in Birmingham
was that he was from Cambridge originally, and he liked having little
trips across to Cambridge. \laughs.\ I don’t know where he’d been
before, but he was despairing of the Birmingham Computing Service, and
“everything in Cambridge was wonderful.” I think the Birmingham
Computing Service were despairing of him as well\! \laughs.\ Mustn’t
be too disparaging, he is a very nice person; but he was quite
demanding, and working in the Computing Service I can quite understand
\laughs\ how some users are.

And I worked for him half time for seven years from home, working in
FORTRAN, working in PASCAL. During that time, as I’ve said, I originally
had a teletype, and then a VDU very shortly afterwards. And then I was
doing some graphics work; the work was mostly concerned with tracing
heredity diseases through family trees—that was his area of interest—and
so there was some graphics involved in that, drawing family trees and
suchlike. And I had an HP, I think it was a 6000 machine, which was one
of the early desktop computers. It was huge\!

**Abbate:**

You had that at home?

**Stewart:**

At home. I did have an engineer out for it on one occasion; he said,
“I’ve never seen one in a house before.” \laughs.\ They were very
expensive in those days. So this would have been just after my daughter
was born, so it was 1979, 1980\.

**Abbate:**

And did the geneticist pay for this?

**Stewart:**

Yes, yes. And it was about six thousand pounds.

**Abbate:**

That must have been nice to have at home\!

**Stewart:**

It was wonderful\! It was wonderful. It was very nice, and it had little
tapes, two tape drives to operate it. It was very nice. Very classy
graphics terminal, which you could program in BASIC as well, so we did
some programming in BASIC. He had a similar machine in Birmingham, so we
could bat the programs backwards and forwards, so we could run both on
the Cambridge system and on these stand-alone terminals. And then the
BBC Micro hit the market in the UK, and I had one of those for awhile.
And again, I was quite doing graphics on that, which was quite
interesting. Again, working in FORTRAN, BASIC and some PASCAL.

**Abbate:**

So how did you do the graphics? Was there a graphics package, or were
you sort of working out how to do it?

**Stewart:**

There was some graphics package—a primitive sort of package—on the HP.
And when I had the BBC Micro I was working on the mainframe here, and
joined the—the BBC Micro could process graphics; we had a chip that was
written in the Computing Service that converted, basically, this little
machine into a terminal that could do graphics.

All the time I was working in the Genetics Department at Birmingham, and
then the person I worked for moved to Oxford, and I followed him to
Oxford, without leaving Cambridge\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Right. Virtually. \laughs.\

**Stewart:**

Yes, virtual following. He was originally a professor of Genetics at
Birmingham, then professor of Human Genetics at Oxford. And his
interests then turned to Human Genome mapping. And so I did a very small
amount of work at the very beginning of that project. There were some
quite interesting programs which we worked on, to install on the
Cambridge mainframe machine, which were known as the Staden programs.

**Abbate:**

The who?

**Stewart:**

Staden. Roger Staden. He was the man who developed these programs. He
worked at the MRC in Cambridge, and he did quite a lot of work on the
Human Genome.

**Abbate:**

What’s the MRC?

**Stewart:**

Medical Research Council; sorry. They employed me throughout the period
I was working for the geneticists. They paid my salary.

**Abbate:**

I see.

**Stewart:**

There was a grant from that kept me going.

So I think at the end of the seven years, John Edwards, who was the
person I worked for, was happy with the Oxford Computing Service, and I
think he felt he couldn’t justify another request for a grant; and that
suited me absolutely fine, because I had had enough of working at home\!
I was climbing the walls by this time. \laughs.\ And I was ready to
get out of the house, in a big way. \laughs.\ My daughter then was
about 4 12 and just about to go to school.

What I haven’t said is, the whole time I was working for Birmingham and
Oxford, I was doing a few hours for the Computing Service here. It was
all writing documentation at that time, and I was just doing that in the
background as well. And so I’d kept my contact with the Computing
Service throughout. So I came back to the Computing Service and I said,
“Have you got any work?” And they said, “Yeah, we’ll find you a few
hours, and we’ll find you a desk.” \laughs.\ That was what I really
wanted. So I worked, then, half time for the Computing Service for about
six to eight months, just coming and going in what time I had to spare,
so that I was leaving time to—my husband was dropping the children off
at school and I was collecting them, and we were struggling through the
holidays quite well. I had made it clear that I would like to come back
full time, and one of my colleagues was taking study leave for a year,
so they said “OK, right: here you are. You can have this.” \laughs.\
So I had a contract for a year. And I think that proved both to the lab
and to me that I could do it. I had to go and find a nanny—we had
somebody that used to come in to look after the children.

**Abbate:**

So this would have been eighty . . .

**Stewart:**

‘84\. Yes. Had an A-level student or someone just come in to collect the
children, look after them until I got home, and we’d do a bit longer in
the school holidays. And then at the end of the year, a vacancy was
available, so I took that. And I’ve been here ever since. \laughs.\

### New Challenges in Computer Service

**Abbate:**

So what position was that?

**Stewart:**

Well, that was still in user support, and it was still supporting
users—more or less the job I’d left seven years before, writing
documentation. But of course, the whole computing world had moved on at
that time, and it was no longer just the mainframe service that we
provided. BBC Micros were the big thing that were in, so while we were
using them as terminals—you know, one of my colleagues had written a
chip that could fit them into a terminal, as I explained—they were also
being used as stand-alone work stations. Again, some of the earliest
microcomputers; IBM PCs were in their infancy. Nothing compared to the
huge, amazingly slow \laughs\ machines \like\ the NCR that I used
originally\! In fact, the NCR that I originally worked on was in a huge
room, as they were in the 1960s, air conditioned, with its operator
sitting in their little air conditioned office; and this huge machine
was 32K, which was the size of the BBC Micro that it was replaced by\!
You know, it’s a sort of a foot by a foot, and two inches thick. So it
was amazing to consider what happened—and of course, far, far different
from what it is today, which is very much a larger \display\ sitting
in front of it. \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

So you had all these new machines to support. But you had also kept up
with it anyway, so it wasn’t new to you.

**Stewart:**

Absolutely, yes, yes. And also, the Macintosh came in at that time, and
I really took to the Mac when it arrived. Apple in the UK were trying to
introduce it to education, and they gave us—the Apple Lab, or Mac Lab—I
can’t quite remember the name they gave it, but they gave us five
machines and the printer, and we put those out for users, and they
really took off in Cambridge. The director we had at that time was very
keen on them, and we went with them in a big way, I think. And the
children loved them as well\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Did you have one at home?

**Stewart:**

We did, yes. Yes. The 512—it was after the Mac Plus, a smaller version
of the Mac Plus—we had one of those, and we’ve had them every since. In
fact, I think we got to the point not very long ago, only a couple of
years ago, where we had eight Macs in the house\! \laughs\. I said,
“Something has to go\!”

**Abbate:**

And only four people?

**Stewart:**

And four people. \laughs.\ Yes, yes. That got ridiculous. So something
had to go there. The children both had them at university, and various
spare machines kicking around that we haven’t quite got rid of. But yes,
we all work on Macs now.

So I came back, anyway, in the early 80s, and was working in user
support, but moving out into more micro support area, and giving courses
on Pagemaker and Word—mostly Mac-oriented courses, but also things like
TEK, and some of the other more general courses that we gave.

**Abbate:**

Did you have UNIX(UNIX "UNIX") machines?

**Stewart:**

Yes, they were coming in at that point. We had had UNIX for some time,
but it was rather a specialized area—we were providing some support to
other departments, but we weren’t running a big service on it. We were
running a fairly small service. The IBM then started to come to the end
of its life, and it was obvious that we were no longer going to be
running a big mainframe service in the same way, and the direction that
we and everyone else was going in was UNIX at that point. So we started
running up UNIX machines in parallel \with the IBM\, to be running a
service—this would be late ‘80s—to investigate initially, obviously, to
see whether we could run a user service on it, and eventually to run the
service that would take over from the old IBM. And the old IBM had
basically run—obviously with lots of replacement hardware in the
meantime—from about 1971 through to ‘94 or so—the same basic system\!
\laughs.\ Developed, as I said; a lot of work went into that. But the
University moved at that point that we were going to buy off-the-shelf
systems; we were not going to develop our own in-house operating
systems. Obviously, that sort of development still goes on, but the
underlying system is UNIX, and is very strongly a pretty vanilla UNIX
with add-ons. So that was developing the whole time, and learning about
that, user education, writing documents, et cetera; keeping that going.

We also had to change our administrative procedures, because when we
were just registering people on one machine, that was simple, and the
database ran on that one machine itself; but in time, of course, we had
to then start adding other services, and a proper database, and
developed—which is now an Oracle database—but again, that database dates
back to 1971\. All the data was imported into the Oracle database and
the underlying structure is really quite similar to what was running at
that time.

The Computing Service was moving on in that time, and user support was
spreading, because we were running little offices of micro support, and
user services, and UNIX support service (our UNIX support is supporting
systems and people who are running the systems, rather than the user
service). \These were\ merging together, and we became a much larger
organization. And at that time I moved more towards the more
administrative side, and I got very much involved in the user
administration, getting users onto the system. I was beginning to
develop procedures—it was, to some extent, forced on us—to get students
onto the system as they came in the door.

**Abbate:**

Who was the user base? I mean, did it start out being just researchers,
or could anyone use it?

**Stewart:**

I think it was open to anybody. If a student came along and expressed
interest, they could have an account on the old IBM system—it was always
open to everybody, I think; but in practice they didn’t. Mostly it was
the scientists—obviously the computer scientists, but mathematicians and
scientists who were coming for accounts; the geographers did, of course,
in their first term; so they’d all have accounts. But then we wouldn’t
see them again \laughs\—one term and that was it\! So it was fairly
light use on the undergraduate front. I think when I left to have James
in 1977 we had about 2,000 users. So a fairly small user base compared
to our 25,000–30,000 users today. It was much bigger when I came back in
‘84\. More people were coming onto the system. And we had various
courses which started—on the first day of term they had a computer
class, and they actually had to sit down in front of a computer and they
had to have an account on that computer.

**Abbate:**

Every student?

**Stewart:**

No, it was just one group of students. They were natural scientists, but
because the way Cambridge works, you don’t actually know who they are;
because all the colleges admit the students, and the University does
know who all their students are and they know what courses they’re
doing, but the department doesn’t know who’s coming.

**Abbate:**

So you can’t prepare the user accounts.

**Stewart:**

You can’t prepare\! \laughs.\ So what we were doing was, at nine
o’clock on the first day of term the lecturer was passing round a tick
list, returning this to us, we were typing all the names in furiously,
and then producing the accounts for two o’clock in the afternoon. And
after we’d done that for a couple of years, we thought there had to be a
better way. So I started to investigate, then, and what you could get
was the names of all 600 natural scientists. You didn’t know whether
they were doing physics, chemistry, or biology, because they could make
that decision when they got here. So we were able to get all 600 on the
system in advance, and then only those who turned up needed to start
using their accounts. So we had that. And in a couple of years I did a
bit more investigation, and we started registering all—because the
courses started developing, and we were going through with other
courses. I mean, it was the one course that really threw us towards bulk
registration, but we then started looking at the other courses who were
coming to us a little later \in the term\, and a little later, and a
little later. So, I started taking their \information\ from the
University student records system, and we started registering all
students as they came in the door. And that’s developed now, so for the
last ten years we just take the data in September, we register
everybody, we give them accounts on the email system, and on the Novell
PC  Mac computer network; and they get those handed out to them as they
arrive in college, and all the forms then come back to us, and all the
registration’s done; and the undergraduate registration now is just
complete routine. We just sit reception down with staplers and 7,000
sheets of paper, and they staple \laughs\ for a day. We’ve thought of
other ways of doing it, but this actually is the most efficient.
\laughs.\ Just use someone with a stapler. And they don’t mind it;
they’re quite used to it now. And gradually we did the same things for
the post-graduates, which is much harder because you really don’t know
who’s coming in then. Post-graduates don’t come in in a huge cohort;
they dribble in. And we now take all staff as well, so, I’ve developed
all the data input so we that can automatically register people in the
database and give them accounts. And that’s what I spend quite a lot of
time doing. My main area is user administration; and I manage that and
I’ve got a deputy and we have people still doing all the day-to-day
work as they always did. But we do a vast amount by automatic
procedures, and by sucking in data from everywhere that we can think of,
and talking to people and . . .

**Abbate:**

Is the general student registration done on computer now?

**Stewart:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

I mean to register at the college.

**Stewart:**

Oh, yes, it’s all very automated. I’m just continuing to develop.
Because there’s a big central body called the UCAS—University Colleges
Admissions something or other—and they coordinate all the applications
for the universities for the entire country, so that students will put
in a list of six universities, and that goes out to the UCAS computer,
and then they communicate directly with the various universities when A
Level results come in. Then they can say, “Yes, you’ve made your grades,
so that’s where you’re going.” And the universities then confirm back.
Everything passes around electronically now, and so we can just suck
straight from our student records all the information we need. Cambridge
is a bit more complicated, because they have all the colleges who have
to confirm the admissions—it’s not just one body, the University; it’s
the colleges who are the admitting bodies, who confirm back to the
University who they’re admitting, or who they carried over from last
year, which sometimes happens. And all that comes in, so it’s a slight
rush; but we assure them it’s no big problem. Again, it’s a complicated
University, because of all the separate bits of it: you can have College
Fellows, who are not staff of the University strictly speaking, they’re
employed by the College; so getting all that information can be quite
tricky. But we have a reasonably smooth operation now, which I keep
developing to get it better.

I also still look after documentation. I don’t write a vast amount
myself. Of course, the documentation side once was writing manuals on
paper and, indeed, typed onto lithograph—I’ve forgotten the name for the
sheet now; we used to run it through a litho machine. That was where you
did documentation. Now, of course, it’s all online; we run the
University Web server. A lot of our documentation now is either getting
straight onto the Web, or on paper and onto the Web, and we make
judgments about where we put the information. So I suppose to a large
extent the job is the same, that we’re still providing documentation to
our users, information that they need to use our systems, but we do it
in very different ways than the way we used to do it, which was wholly
paper based. But we keep looking to see which way we should be going,
how we should be providing the information. Obviously a lot should be on
the Web. But the bit of paper that says “How do I start a Web browser?”
has to be on paper. \laughs.\

### Computing Security Concerns for Universities

**Abbate:**

Do you have to worry about security?

**Stewart:**

Yes. That’s the other area that I moved into. Because of the
administration role, largely, and the getting information out to users,
I somehow—I can’t quite remember how \laughs\—moved into the area of
Internet security. And I’m now half of the CERT team. That’s Computer
Emergency Response Team. Basically, we look after security incidents—we
look out for vulnerabilities and for alerts . . .

**Abbate:**

\We were talking about\ security concerns . . .

PS. Yes, yes. We’re taking information—there’s a parent body for the UK
which is the UK universities CERT team, and then all the universities
have their own security teams, and of course all the countries have
their own security teams, so we’re part of that web of information
passing around. We’re just trying to keep the University secure, keep
the hackers out, and ensure that we are as secure as we can be. And that
has grown enormously. I think, when we first started about three or four
years ago, there were a very small number of incidents. And now we’re
probed all the time; we don’t have too many break-ins actually, we do
quite well, but every so often we’ll have a big break-in, and that just
takes over for a couple of weeks while we sort it all out and re-secure
all the machines.

**Abbate:**

And is that from outside? Or do you think that’s students hacking
around?

**Stewart:**

It’s mostly from outside. We do also have our problems inside, of
course, and that’s part of my role as well, dealing with the naughty
students \laughs\—in all sorts of ways. Not only the hacking—they like
to probe other Universities—but of course there are things like: they’re
all running MP3s and Napster, and there are various associations—the
British Phonographic Industry keep an eye out to see who’s violating
their copyright; the Motion Picture Association of America also like to
do the same thing—and those are just two that have cropped up in the
last two weeks. So we’re then dealing with students and trying to
enforce the rules \laughs\—which they’ve all signed up to, of course,
and which they take no notice of at all, and pretend they don’t know
anything about it. But you know, it is a real world and they have to
behave themselves. And then of course there’s the usual problems that
you get with young people in universities harassing each other, or
various things that they do to each other.

**Abbate:**

And you’re responsible for all that?

**Stewart:**

Well, I get involved in quite a lot of it, yes. I will usually involve
the college or some other authority, depending on the particular issue.
Because while we are responsible for the security of our networks, and
for keeping the rules of CUDN, and use of computers being within the
guidelines, real disciplinary matters go to the colleges—for
students—and so we would just pass those on, if that’s what it is.
Obviously, if they’re really hacking, then we might well handle it
ourselves, but I don’t get involved in matters that are not to do with
computers. But if it involves the computer then very often I’ll be
involved, either because somebody will come directly or because the
department or college or the university will ask for help and guidance
in dealing with the computer side of it. Also, if we need to trace
anything through our logs then it has to be coordinated at this end, so
we’re dealing with that sort of thing. So the rule has become very much
dealing with people, and I quite enjoy that. I do feel I’ve lost my
technical side, and I regret that, but there’s still quite a lot to
dealing with databases, and Internet security, and there’s still a lot
of learning to do. My knowledge of Internet security is not great; I
rely on my colleagues to guide me, and to explain things from time to
time. But I’ve got a pretty general, basic grounding in that area, and I
suppose I’ve become a generalist, rather than anything very specific,
which to a large extent I was when I was writing documentation: it is a
very generalist sort of area. And that’s why, I suppose, I kept in that
mold, rather than becoming a programming specialist.

**Abbate:**

So you know what the policy aims are, and someone else can fill in some
of the technical bits?

**Stewart:**

Absolutely. Yes, yes. So we see the alerts coming through, and either I
can understand that this an issue for us, or I can say to somebody, “Do
I need to worry about this?” and they’ll explain if necessary. And
there’s a lot of contacting people and reassuring them—or not, as the
case may be\! \laughs\ Panicking them if necessary. \laughs.\ Yes,
so there’s plenty of backup if I need it, which is helpful.

### Future Concerns for Computing Services

**Abbate:**

Do you also have a vision of where the Computing Service should be going
in the next decade, or that sort of thing?

**Stewart:**

\Pause.\ I can see things that will happen. You can see trends in the
way the students are coming in. For example, at the moment, we’re
providing them all with email accounts when they come into the
University. They like to keep their accounts after they’ve gone, which
we don’t let them do, obviously; we want them to be gone. But it wasn’t
obvious where they went to next, because they would have a gap between
one university and the next, or one university and their employer, and
this perhaps caused them a little bit of a problem. But email in those
days wasn’t quite so important. This last year or so, we have seen them
coming in to the University with hotmail accounts. Now there’s a
conflict here, because if I actually think about it: they come in with a
hotmail account, they’re going to go out with a hotmail account, so what
are we doing here? Well, we are providing service, because we need to be
able to contact the students while they’re here, and it isn’t sensible
for us to be keeping track of their hotmail accounts, especially when
they can so easily be moved, canceled, for any reason; they’re very easy
to change, a free account for another account. So, I think we still have
a role here, if it’s only a forwarding service.

I mean, a lot of students do value having their Cambridge accounts
because they’re not flooded with the advertising. And of course we get
spammed, quite a lot; we try not to let that happen, but you can’t do a
great deal about it. If you go on newsgroups they’re going to pick up
your email address, and you’ll get spammed by that. But in the longer
term for a student, I can quite see they need to keep something like
their hotmail account going—or they can ditch it and come back to it in
another—when they leave again; but obviously it’s where their friends
from school know a contact point. And the students now seem to think
that they must have this one contact point for the rest of their life\!
Well, it’s not something that any of us really expected for many, many
years. You know: you move house, you didn’t have email, you didn’t have
the same telephone number—you did get lost. And I don’t think you do
really expect to keep in contact with your friends. But of course when
you leave school you don’t think in quite those ways. When you leave
college you don’t think in those ways; you think you’re always going to
know these people. \But\ even if you know where they are, you don’t
tend to contact them every day. \laughs.\

So, I think, for our purposes, we still need to be able to contact the
students by email, and we are going to want to keep running that
service, in some way or another. We’re going to be running the network
continuously, I think. If we’ve moved to the point where all students
came in with their own machines, the need for us to provide a large
number of machines for them to use for class purposes would still be
there. So when they’re doing their class work, there would still need to
be machines there for them to use. They perhaps won’t need so much in
terms of a computer room where they can go in the evening to do their
email, because they’ll be doing that from their rooms, perhaps.

**Abbate:**

Are the residences networked?

**Stewart:**

Yes, yes. All the colleges have some network connection; some have 100
percent network connection—it’s very variable. But a very high
proportion of the college rooms now are networked. So the students, at
least theoretically, can come and plug into a great many rooms. And they
do that. And they’re running services from their rooms: Napster, etc.
\laughs.\ So that sort of thing will continue. Certainly, with this
being a research university, there still is a role, and some
departments, like Physics—scientific departments—do have their own
computing resources, where they’re using very heavyweight and specialist
resources, which is not appropriate for a Computing Service to provide.
We’re really there for the other resources—for example, email. Why does
every department run email? There might as well be one central resource
for that. And departments like history, and so on, need the
infrastructure services, even though they’re using PCs and Macs for
their everyday work. So, I think largely we’re going to be
infrastructure, with some backup resources, perhaps, as well.

**Abbate:**

Do you see moving to multi-media or any sort of radically new things?

**Stewart:**

I think that, yes, some of the departments are looking more in that
direction. I’m not involved in that area, but certainly there is
interest, and yes, I suspect we will go that way. To what extent I’ll
see it in the areas I work in, I’m not sure; I think those who are
teaching and giving courses are going to be much more involved in that
area.

**Abbate:**

Do you support the people giving courses?

**Stewart:**

Sorry, I was thinking there of the people in the Computing Service who
give courses . . .

**Abbate:**

Oh.

**Stewart:**

. . . who are mostly giving courses to University staff and students in
whatever topics are of interest at the moment. So I can see that they
will go in that area. Yes, we do support the Lecturers and the
Departments, especially where they need central resources. So our big
PWF network—that’s the PCs and Macintosh network, Novell Network; it’s
called PWF, but it’s just basically a Novell network— is used a lot in
teaching, and that provides various rooms where we do teaching or
departments can do teaching. And we also provide management services for
classes inside departments and colleges, and that is expanding at the
moment, so that we’re facilities-managing quite a large part of the
individual networks. To begin with, because there are the thirty-one
colleges, they were all running their own little network with their own
computer officer, and then we were running central resources; whereas in
other universities where it is just a university without the college
structure, of course the Computing Service would be running everything,
or the departments would be running it. You wouldn’t have this other
layer of the colleges, which is across subject areas—so, you know, you
have your department of physics with its network, but King’s College
will have physics, medicine, every subject inside there.

**Abbate:**

Sounds like a nightmare. \laughs.\

**Stewart:**

So it weaves all ways round. But what we’re doing now is, some of the
college networks and some of the department networks, we actually do the
facilities management for them. So they’re still responsible for what
goes on there—they’re responsible for the day-to-day management, putting
the paper in the printer, et cetera—but we register all the users, we
maintain the machines in terms of system software, which saves having a
large number of people all doing the same job in a small way. You just
have a larger team producing the work for the whole University. So that
sort of thing, I think, will continue.

**Abbate:**

What proportion of the Computer Service staff are women?

**Stewart:**

In the Computing Service? I think it’s around 30 to 40 percent. If you
take that on the programming staff—the graduate staff—that will come up
to be probably about 30 percent, I think, most of them working in the
support area. A few programmers, but mostly working in the support area.
I think that’s quite typical of universities—I’m not sure, but I think
it is. When I go to user support workshops, you see a larger proportion
of women than you would see at a networking sort of workshop, for
example.

### Gender Concerns and Balancing Work and Family

**Abbate:**

So that’s a separate staff, the networking . . . ?

**Stewart:**

Well, we have various groups. And the networking tends to be fairly
male; UNIX support is fairly male; for the more specialist programming
conferences—security—there are not very many women there. But if you go
to a support workshop you will find that there are more women.
\laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Have you ever encountered gender discrimination at any of your jobs, in
terms of people’s behavior, or pay scales, or promotion, or anything
like that?

**Stewart:**

Not since I’ve been in the University. I think in the very early days,
60s, 70s, there was some discrimination there, both in Barclay’s and in
Cambridge Consultants. But in the University, I haven’t found that. I’ve
been very happy with the arrangements. I don’t think there’s—certainly
not much—gender discrimination. Certainly not in the pay scale, no; I
haven’t seen that. Which is good\!

**Abbate:**

Yes. \laughs.\

**Stewart:**

I’m not sure what I would have done about it if I had. \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Did you have a lot of trouble balancing work and family while you were
raising your kids?

**Stewart:**

Yes. Yes, I think so. It’s a very difficult decision. I think I always
knew that I had to work, for myself, that I would be useless as a mother
sitting at home, without some clear aim in life that wasn’t just child
based. And that doesn’t criticize anyone who can do it, it’s just not
for me. My mother had gone out to work when I was five, and I could
quite see that I was going to do exactly the same, and I can see my
daughter’s going to be exactly the same. It just is the way we are. Not
being focused in that way.

**Abbate:**

Right.

**Stewart:**

My husband recognized that, obviously, and it obviously gives us a
different standard of living, which we both appreciate, I think. When I
was working at home, then he would be there to look after the children
in the evening. He’d look after them at the weekends when I was working,
so he would support me in that. When I came back to work, he was
supporting me by \getting\ the children up in the morning—we were
splitting things. He would take time off work—I slipped a disk at one
point, he had to take six weeks off work. I could still work
\laughs\—lie in bed and work—and he couldn’t\! \laughs.\ He was
looking after the children.

We stayed in Cambridge. His career would undoubtedly have progressed
much better if he’d been free to move.

**Abbate:**

Now, he was doing . . . ?

**Stewart:**

He was doing radio astronomy, but he moved into accountancy. There were
certain times when we distinctly thought of moving, but that would have
meant that I wouldn’t have had the ties that I had—especially when the
children were small, where I was using my Cambridge ties to keep me in
work, before I was really available for the job market again. And I
would have lost those. So we decided that it probably wasn’t the best
move to make at that time. He’s done all the traveling. He’s worked
forty miles away, twenty miles away. He’s back in Cambridge now, but for
a long time he was doing all the commuting. So that sort of support has
been very helpful.

The other support I had was: my parents, after I was married, moved to
live in St. Anne’s, which is on the coast near Manchester, about forty
miles from Manchester, and my parents used to take the children during
the school holidays. They’d take them for a fortnight, or a week, or
whatever; and that was wonderful. That gave us just that little bit of
space that made it all doable.

**Abbate:**

I’m sure the kids liked it, too.

**Stewart:**

They loved it. They loved it\! They would spend every day on the beach
that it was possible to spend on the beach, in Blackpool. And then,
Blackpool has a great big fairground, and they would go there every
night. \laughs.\ They adored it, they really did.

**Abbate:**

Did either of them go into computing?

**Stewart:**

My son is a communications engineer, so on the borders of
computing—engineer, physics, computing. You know, he’s very much a
chip.

**Abbate:**

A chip?

**Stewart:**

A chip off the old block.

**Abbate:**

Oh. \laughs.\ I thought you meant a computer chip\!

**Stewart:**

\laughs.\ Yes, quite so, yes. So, he is close to computing, rather
than actually being in computing. And my daughter’s a drama student.
\laughs\. So, nothing more to be said on that one\! \laughs.\ But
she is computer literate.

**Abbate:**

All those Macs in the house.

**Stewart:**

Absolutely, yes, she’s got an iMac at college and is pretty handy with
computers. But she doesn’t want to spend her life in front of a screen.

**Abbate:**

Well, have you spent your life in front of a screen?

**Stewart:**

I do it now, but I didn’t used to. Now my work is much more planning and
administration. I do spend quite a lot of time in front of a screen. But
the phone never stops ringing, and I see a lot of people, I talk to a
lot of people, and my colleagues come and talk to me quite a lot as
well. So, in fact, I have a very varied job. At this time of year, when
it is quiet—it’s in a vacation, it’s just before Easter, so it really is
quite dead—then I’m spending quite a lot of time in front of the screen;
but come term starting again, just after Easter, it’ll be busy again,
and I’ll be dealing with people much more. So the quiet periods are
quite useful. \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

It must be a relief, some of the time.

**Stewart:**

It is, yes. It’s when I do the catching up that I have to do, and have
to get through. It’s quite hard work to get that solid screen work.

### How has the Field Changed

**Abbate:**

How would you say the field of computing has changed since you started?

**Stewart:**

Enormously\! \laughs.\ Obviously, in 1969, it was a field for the very
few. The general public knew nothing about it—even people who were
associated with computers. For example, when I first started in
Barclay’s, if you went into your local branch and asked for your
balance, they would say, “Oh no, we can’t tell you your balance, the
computer broke down last night.” And I’d say, “No it didn’t\!”
\laughs.\ “I was on call\!” So they could use it much more in that
sort of excuse; you could pull the wool easily over the public’s eyes.
It was always the computer’s fault, et cetera. You can’t do that now.
Everyone’s aware of computers; it’s part of everybody’s life. It’s not a
privileged, reserved, occupation in that sense. People, I suppose
generally, probably hadn’t got a clue about computers in those days. Now
they all think they’ve got a clue about computers, but of course what
they’re actually using is a very, very limited subset of the
alternatives that are available. I don’t suppose the majority of people
actually think what goes between sitting on your modem and getting your
email there and back, and what happens in the middle. So, all that side
of it still is a huge mystery to the general public, but they have much
more accessibility.

When I first started, it was very much a nine-to-five job. No, that’s
slightly misleading: your work was at your office; you couldn’t take it
home it with you. I mean, you might take a bit of paper home to
scribble, or you might be thinking, dwelling in the background. But, you
couldn’t . . .

**Abbate:**

. . . dial up from home.

**Stewart:**

Yes, you couldn’t do any of those sorts of things. And now it’s very
much more part of life. Especially with the security side of things. We
keep in contact over the weekends, to make sure that everything’s OK.
And it’s easy to dial up; the computer is just sitting there at home;
it’s not a problem. The accessibility is very much greater.

You can contact people more easily. When we first started networking in
the early days of the Internet, we could send messages easily within our
own computer. You know, we’d just have what is now an email
conversation, but within the University, always using the same machine.
If you needed to get out, you’d have to have this incantation—a sentence
everywhere—routing your email message in great detail, to get it to
anywhere outside your immediate domain. Now of course, it’s easy. You
can find people easily. Information—for what it’s worth, in some
cases\!—is very easily available. It’s changed enormously.

I’m still developing, of course. I couldn’t possibly have seen the
scope, in ‘69, for what it is now. Just looking now at the world, and
widening the area from just computing, because: WAP phones, digital
cameras, PDAs, and palmtops—I would include them all in the same general
field now. And there is so much integration to happen there yet, so many
things to come together. And indeed, Internet into the home—a permanent
connection into the home—is still to some extent in its infancy. You
know, there’s a long way to go on all those sort of areas, and there’s
just so much to come yet. And I should think by the time I retire in
another ten years or so, I expect to have everything just at home, and
not worry about a modem. \laughs.\ I expect to have a line there, and
what I’ll do, I don’t know—have to wait and see\! But I expect to have
that sort of connection with computing in general.

I also find it very nice and relaxing that I can talk to my children at
any time I want to, by email. You didn’t do that before; you didn’t have
that sort of contact. You know, it was much further away. Now my
daughter will go to India for the summer, or for a month in the summer,
and I’ll get an email saying “Hi\! I’m OK\!” \laughs.\ It’s just such
a small world now. It’s brought us a lot closer together, I think, in
many ways.

**Abbate:**

Do you think the culture of computing has changed?

**Stewart:**

In that it’s opened up to many more people, yes. Yes. When it was that
very small group of people, it . . . Well, you didn’t have to worry
about hacking, for example, because there was nothing on the machine to
hack. Our earliest hacking incident was in the early ‘80s, but again,
that was very easy to track down. But I think people had a clearer code
of practice in those days, of what it was all about, because they were
all computer people, professional people. Now it’s a different scene, I
think, especially with the hacking side of it. Yes, I think the culture
is quite different. And just the fact that one can use it, I think, also
adds to the cultural side—that yes, it’s part of life. It’s not
specialist, it is very much a part of everyone’s life.

**Abbate:**

Do you think it’s become more open to women?

**Stewart:**

I suppose it has, yes. Yes, I think it probably has. Bringing it into
the home will do that. \pause.\ Yes, I think it probably has. There
still are barriers to break down. I think there are women who have not
been used to computers, depending on their job, of course. Those who are
not in a work place using a machine all the time will still have a
barrier there. But if there’s a computer in the home, that’s going to
break down that barrier. Secretaries, of course, have computers
available to them all the time. They’re using them all the time. That
barrier has gone, in that sense. I suspect that the more vulnerable
groups are people like teachers, where they’re not using them every day.
They are tool in a classroom where a small number of people will be
using it, and all the students know how to use it, and so this huge
barrier of “I don’t know; how am I going to learn?” I suspect that
is—and indeed, from what I see from my children’s school—I think that
is something that needs to be overcome. And having a machine in the home
is going to give you the space to do that. I’m sure there are lots of
professions where there is a big barrier, but it’s quite interesting
that the secretarial staff got there and other staff haven’t. Because of
the tool on the desk.

**Abbate:**

Do the secretaries then learn anything learn anything more about it than
just the world processor?

**Stewart:**

No. I don’t think so, no. Email, of course; browsing the Web. But I
mean, that’s quite a substantial chunk of what you’re doing—the bulk of
use of computers today is email, word processing, the Web. I don’t think
that they will get into programming. I don’t think that many people get
into programming. My daughter, for example, will never get into
programming. She’ll use it as a part of her life, rather than a tool.
She won’t, for example, learn packages for design. She’s a designer. So,
designing stage sets: it’s a tool in that respect. But she’ll use the
Web to find information. And I think that’s the way people will use it.
And that’s a fine way to use it. Not everybody has to program. It’s not
part of life\! \laughs.\ It’s a specialist occupation.

**Abbate:**

Did you have any mentors or role models when you were starting out?

**Stewart:**

No.

**Abbate:**

Or later on? Ever?

**Stewart:**

\pause.\ No, I don’t think so. No. My colleagues here perhaps were all
more or less at the same sort of stage as me, so no, I don’t think there
was in that respect.

**Abbate:**

Have you found yourself mentoring anyone else who’s trying to learn
about computers?

**Stewart:**

Occasionally. Occasionally. Some of the staff we’ve had who have been
moving into computing from another area. Perhaps a little, yes. Not
hugely.

**Abbate:**

So what have you found the most satisfying aspects of working with
computers?

**Stewart:**

Ooh. \laughs.\ Gosh, that’s a difficult question.

**Abbate:**

There’s so many, or . . . ?

**Stewart:**

\laughs.\ It’s kept me employed\! \laughs.\ But it’s challenging. I
suppose the most satisfying thing is, I cannot imagine me doing a job
that was the same—and this changes every day, every year. I cannot
imagine having been in any job for twenty-five years—working in the
Computing Service, with the gap of course—working in the same place for
so long, if there wasn’t continual change. And I think that’s probably
the one thing that’s really, really kept me in this. I think if I were
just to have been programming, I would have got bored with it in a few
years. But because I’ve been working in very changing areas all the
time, where it has to develop, and you have to keep up with everything
that’s going on, I think that’s probably the most rewarding side, and
the most satisfying for me.

**Abbate:**

You picked the right field\!

**Stewart:**

\laughs\ I think I did, yes\! By accident—but there we are. And I’ve
just been very lucky, really; the right opportunities have come along at
the right time, and I’ve had the right support. In fact, I think I’ve
been very fortunate in my career.

**Abbate:**

Do you have any advice for young women contemplating a computer career
today?

**Stewart:**

Hmm . . . I would think: Keep your options open. Don’t get too narrow,
is probably a useful guide. Unless that’s what you really want to do,
and that satisfies you. But if you’re considering taking a career break
in any shape or form, even if that’s \just reducing your hours\—when
you have children you can really only manage nine-to-five, you can’t use
all hours in the day—then keep it wide, and keep your options open. I
think that is probably the best move.

**Abbate:**

All right. I think you’ve probably answered all my questions, unless
I’ve missed any important parts of your career.

**Stewart:**

I can’t think of any offhand, no. \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Have you been active in any computer societies, or those sorts of
things?

**Stewart:**

No. No, I think you keep working and don’t bother to have time for
these. No, I haven’t.

**Abbate:**

Well, thank you very much.

**Stewart:**

It’s a pleasure. I hope it’s helpful\!

Retrieved from
"<http:ethw.orgindex.php?title=Oral-History:Pat_Stewart&oldid=108652>"

Categories(Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* Computer network
  management(Category:Computer_network_management "Category:Computer network management")
* Home & family(Category:Home_%26_family "Category:Home & family")
* Workplace(Category:Workplace "Category:Workplace")
* Universities(Category:Universities "Category:Universities")
* Formal
  specifications(Category:Formal_specifications "Category:Formal specifications")
* Guidelines(Category:Guidelines "Category:Guidelines")
* Telecommunication
  standards(Category:Telecommunication_standards "Category:Telecommunication standards")

## Contents

* 1 About Pat Stewart(#About_Pat_Stewart)
* 2 About the Interview(#About_the_Interview)
* 3 Copyright Statement(#Copyright_Statement)
* 4 Interview(#Interview)
  * 4\.1 Family and Early Education(#Family_and_Early_Education)
  * 4\.2 Barclay’s Bank and First
    Computer(#Barclay.E2.80.99s_Bank_and_First_Computer)
  * 4\.3 Marriage and Moving to
    Cambridge(#Marriage_and_Moving_to_Cambridge)
  * 4\.4 Working at the Institute of
    Astronomers(#Working_at_the_Institute_of_Astronomers)
  * 4\.5 Developing a Career in Computer
    Services(#Developing_a_Career_in_Computer_Services)
  * 4\.6 New Challenges in Computer
    Service(#New_Challenges_in_Computer_Service)
  * 4\.7 Computing Security Concerns for
    Universities(#Computing_Security_Concerns_for_Universities)
  * 4\.8 Future Concerns for Computing
    Services(#Future_Concerns_for_Computing_Services)
  * 4\.9 Gender Concerns and Balancing Work and
    Family(#Gender_Concerns_and_Balancing_Work_and_Family)
  * 4\.10 How has the Field Changed(#How_has_the_Field_Changed)

!Powered by
MediaWiki(resourcesassetspoweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)(www.mediawiki.org)
!Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki(extensionsSemanticMediaWikiincludes..resourcesimagessmw_button.png)(https:www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 21 November 2014, at 10:48\.

* This page has been accessed 1,588 times.

* About ETHW(ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* Policies and disclaimers(ETHW:Policies "ETHW:Policies")

