Toggle navigation   

[ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki](/Main_Page)

* [** Go ****]()
  * [Browse by Subject](/ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * [Encyclopedia](/Encyclopedia)
  
  * [Oral Histories](/Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * [First Hand Histories](/First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * [Landmarks/Milestones](/Landmarks)
  
  * [Archives](/Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * [Education](/ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * [Random page](/Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * [Help](/Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * [Contact us](/Special:Contact)
  
  * 
  * [Recent changes](/Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * [New pages](/Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* [** Actions ****]()
  * [View
    source](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Paula_Hawthorn&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]")
  
  * [History](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Paula_Hawthorn&action=history "Past revisions of this page [h]")
  
  * 
  * [Oral-History](/Oral-History:Paula_Hawthorn)
  
  * [Discussion](/index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Paula_Hawthorn&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page [t]")
  
  * 
* [** Tools ****]()
  * [What links
    here](/Special:WhatLinksHere/Oral-History:Paula_Hawthorn "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]")
  
  * [Related
    changes](/Special:RecentChangesLinked/Oral-History:Paula_Hawthorn "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]")
  
  * [Special
    pages](/Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages [q]")
  
  * [Printable
    version](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Paula_Hawthorn&printable=yes "Printable version of this page [p]")
  
  * [Permanent
    link](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Paula_Hawthorn&oldid=108338 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * [Page
    information](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Paula_Hawthorn&action=info)
  
  * [Browse properties](/Special:Browse/Oral-2DHistory:Paula_Hawthorn)
* [** Account ****](# "Account")
  * [Log
    in](/index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3APaula+Hawthorn)
  
  * 
  * [Request account](/Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Paula Hawthorn

## About Paula Hawthorn

Paula Hawthorn was born in 1943 in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. She attended
the University of Houston and planned to be a math teacher, but after an
arrest for involvement in a civil rights protest, she was barred from
teaching in Texas. After graduating from Houston with a degree in
mathematics, she worked with computers at Texaco, processing credit-card
information. From there she moved to the University of California,
Berkeley to receive her PhD in Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, which was granted in 1979\. Her dissertation was on the
performance of database systems.

She then worked at Hewlett-Packard, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, and a number of influential start-up companies, where she
was usually Vice-President of Software Development. At the time of this
interview, Hawthorn had semi-retired and was performing part-time
consulting work.

In this interview, Hawthorn discusses the problems with being a
single-mother and working through a graduate program, her efforts to
start women's support groups at colleges and companies she worked for,
and the development of general versus special-purpose machinery.

\

## About the Interview

PAULA HAWTHORN: An Interview Conducted by Janet Abbate for the IEEE
History Center, 5 July 2002\.

Interview \#600 for the IEEE History Center, The Institute of Electrical
and Electronic Engineers, Inc.

\

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
the IEEE History Center Oral History Program, IEEE History Center at
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ
07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include identification of
the specific passages to be quoted, anticipated use of the passages, and
identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Paula Hawthorn, an oral history conducted in 2002 by Janet Abbate, IEEE
History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

\

## Interview

INTERVIEW: Paula Hawthorn\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: 5 July 2002\
PLACE: Hawthorn's home in Oakland, California

\

### Background and Education

**Abbate:**

I’m talking with Paula Hawthorn, July 5th, 2002\.

I always start at the very beginning, so can you tell me when you were
born and where you grew up?

**Hawthorn:**

I was born in 1943, in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. I was the child of a
serviceman and a nurse. Apparently it was a shotgun wedding. They
divorced when I was two, and my mother took me on an odyssey out to
California. (She had relatives in California.) She became an alcoholic,
had a lot of problems, and would periodically abandon me with my
relatives. When I was nine they got tired of that, and they shipped me
back to Texas to stay with my paternal grandmother for the summer—to
shock my mother into taking better care of me, or something. But my
father, who then was living in Indiana with his second wife and two
children, came down to Texas that summer and took me.

So at nine I went to live with my father and stepmother, in an
environment where they were trying to do the best they could with this
“street child.” But the only way I had to feel good about myself—I was
overweight, I didn’t talk correct English, I was unkempt—was that I was
very good at math. I’d always been very good at math. My stepmother and
my two younger brothers could not comprehend mathematics, \[but\] my
father loved mathematics, had always loved the math problems in the
various science magazines and stuff. The fact that I was good in math
was my way of showing everyone that I could do what I wanted. So I was
going to be a math teacher.

My parents were from Texas, and they moved back to Texas when I was
twelve; I grew up from that point in Dallas. I was always going to be a
math teacher. I escaped the house at eighteen, married my first husband,
and he and I went to school at the University of Houston. I was going to
be a math teacher; that was an approved vocation for women of my
generation and my upbringing. But because of the way I’d been brought
up, when we moved back to Texas when I was twelve, I simply could not
understand—it didn’t make any sense to me—all the things that happened
with black people. I would always sit at the back of the bus; I would
always drink out of the black drinking fountains. I thought it was the
most stupid thing. You know kids—I just thought it was stupid. It was
illogical; it was stupid. My parents would say, “Well, black people are
dirty,” and then I’d say, “Well, then why does Aunt Patsy have Martha
Kay taking care of the kitchen? I mean, if they’re dirty . . . . She
does a great job in the kitchen.” So my husband and I were involved in
the civil rights movement, and we were arrested; and because I was
arrested, I was not able to do my student teaching in the Houston
Independent School District, which was segregated at the time. To have
been arrested for civil rights meant you couldn’t teach. They wouldn’t
employ you.

**Abbate:**

Do you think it was specifically a ban on people who were arrested for
civil rights, or if you’d been arrested for anything?

**Hawthorn:**

God knows. I didn’t contest it. I hadn’t found the education courses I’d
taken to be all that interesting; I didn’t feel that I had found my
vocation. But here I was, one semester away from graduating from the
University of Houston with a degree in math, and nothing to do\! A
friend of ours said, “Have you ever thought of computers?” And I said,
“No.” Then he said, “Well, you like math; you could be good at that
stuff. Why don’t take this course in computers?” He’d taken it and found
it very interesting, so I took it.

That was in 1965\. At the time, at the University of Houston, we didn’t
have a computer. We wrote the programs, we punched the punch cards on
the punch-card machine, they wrapped them up, and they sent them off by
bus to Austin, where they had a computer. They ran the program there,
and a day later we’d get it; so we had about thirty-six hour turnaround
on running our computer programs. You got very good at desk checking\! I
loved it. I aced the course; I just did fantastic. It was wonderful.

Interview time came around, and people from various companies were
interviewing people to see if they could be programmers. Bell Labs was
also there. Bell Labs was interviewing people to see if they could go
into their program (which they had for years) where they would send you
to school for a Master’s degree and then you would agree to work with
Bell. They talked with me, and they told me I would have gotten it
except I was a married woman, and they expected that I would drop out
and have children. Again, I did not contest that.

Texaco was there, and Texaco was hiring math majors: women who had As in
math and men who had Bs and above.

**Abbate:**

Oh, my goodness\! Was that explicit?

**Hawthorn:**

That was very explicit. Nobody thought anything about that.

I took a lot of engineering math—engineering math was just applied
mathematics, but they called it “engineering math”—and I was good at it.
My teacher said, “Haven’t you ever thought of being an engineer?” and I
just giggled. I remember that conversation to this day. I said, “Of
course not\! I’m a girl.” He gave me this look like I had said something
that made absolutely no sense, and I thought, “Hmm\! That’s
interesting.” You know, it had never occurred to me.

It never occurred to any of us that computer programming would
eventually become something that was thought of as a men’s field. At the
time—just as now, actually—in the intro, beginning, lower levels of
employment, it was at least half women. There were a lot of women who
made straight As in math\! \[laughs\]

### Starting at Texaco

**Hawthorn:**

I went to work for Texaco in Houston. I was in the Maintenance Group,
which means that I helped to figure out what was wrong with programs
that other people had written. I had a ball\! It was just the most fun.
It was challenging. You’d have a problem, and you’d figure out what it
was—by deduction, mostly, and by reading other people’s code. It was so
challenging—mentally challenging—and it was a lot of fun. You always
felt like the heroine when you found out what the problem was.

**Abbate:**

May I ask what kind of system that was?

**Hawthorn:**

This was the Texaco First Credit Card facility, and it was really fancy.
That was when they were first bar-coding. What happened when you went to
the Texaco gas station was that they had this roller thing that would
roll your credit card number, and then the person would fill in the
amount, or they would have keys where they could roll in the amount. It
would record your credit card number and five dollars and twenty-five
cents for the gas, and then those cards would come in to the Houston
facility. They would go through Recognition Equipment Incorporated’s
readers, which would read the account number and the amount and then
bar-code on the back what it was. From then on, they would go through
bar-code readers in order to sort all these things. We always returned
the receipts to the customers. You’d sort it all, and you’d get all the
receipts for a single account, and they would go into massive bins.
Every day of the month you were doing a billing cycle for a different
group of people, and so each day you would take a month’s worth \[of
receipts\] for that group and run those through and do the bills for
them.

In a career-altering decision, the head of the credit-card billing had
decided not to go with IBM, but to go with RCA; so an RCA Spectra 70 was
the machine that was used for doing the actual billing. The Recognition
Equipment machines were programmed with punched paper tape. There was
one machine that we used where you could put in your punch cards, and it
would compile the program and punch out the paper tape, and then the
rest of the machines would just read that paper tape. I became an
absolute expert on patching paper tape—if it tore, there was a
problem—and on doing binary patches, so that you didn’t have to go
back and recompile.

I said it was a career-changing decision for that manager, because of
course RCA stopped making the Spectra 70s, and they eventually had to
move over to IBM.

**Abbate:**

I’d never heard of anyone who used the RCA, until now.

**Hawthorn:**

Well, you got one\! It was a good machine, actually.

### Computer Courses

**Abbate:**

What machine did you use in school when you took that computer course?

**Hawthorn:**

It was an IBM 7090\.

**Abbate:**

So you already knew the IBM. And was that in the math department?

**Hawthorn:**

Was that course taught in the math department? Yes, it must have been.
They did not have a computer department; it must have been in the math
department. The other place it could have been would have been in one of
the engineering departments, but I believe it was in the math
department.

**Abbate:**

Now, there were probably a lot of women majoring in math. Were there
also a lot in the computer course?

**Hawthorn:**

I have no memory of how many women there were in the computer course. I
can tell you that it didn’t dawn on me to even wonder. I suspect there
were a lot; I think that probably there were. I know that when I went to
Texaco, it was at least half women that were there. I was the only woman
in Maintenance, but that was out of five people. It was no problem. I
mean, it’s never been a problem, but it was not anything that anyone
even remarked upon.

As I’m sure other people have told you, in the beginning in computer
science, it was much more female, because the bar to entry was not at
that time an engineering education, and there wasn’t this sense of,
“Well, computers are for guys.” For a lot of women, it was simply an
extension of accounting, and there are a lot of women accountants.
Especially at Texaco, where it was accounting, really; we were taking
credit cards and summing up the information. This was one step above
having an adding machine. None of us really thought of it as an
engineering field, especially.

**Abbate:**

So do you think it’s actually become harder for women, in a sense?

**Hawthorn:**

I absolutely do.

In the early days, as I’m sure other people have told you, you didn’t
have to have a certain set of prerequisites to be a computer scientist
or to be a computer programmer. You had to have a good mind. By “good,”
I mean you had to understand logic and be able to do that. There wasn’t
this sense that you had to have a degree in computer science. So there
were lots more women, who came from lots of other occupations. I’ll tell
you more about some of those women as we go through my life story.

**Abbate:**

Did you know, as soon as you took that first computer class, that you
wanted to work with computers?

**Hawthorn:**

Oh, absolutely\! I just couldn’t believe someone would—I still can’t
believe somebody would pay you to do that\! It was the most fun ever.
I’ve always been very spiritual, and I felt like this was fated. It
was so much fun, and they paid you\! And it still is, and they still pay
me an enormous amount, when I choose to work. It’s amazing. Yes, I loved
it; I just loved it. I felt like I’d found my vocation.

### Return to School

**Hawthorn:**

But then the problem was, I wanted to have children. I had my first son.
I’d worked for three years; I worked up until almost the day he was
born. I got huge when I got pregnant—he was almost ten pounds—and there
was a guy who refused to ride on the elevator with me, I was just so
huge. He was afraid I would have that baby right then\! I had always
planned on staying home with the kids, of course. You know, this was
1969; Andrew was born in ‘69\. So I was going to stay home, and then I
just got so bored, I wanted to go back to work part time, but they
wouldn’t let me. They did not allow part-time workers. In spite of the
fact that I had been outstanding and would have been outstanding as a
part-time worker, they wouldn’t let me; and I wasn’t going to go to work
full time, because of the child-care situation.

**Abbate:**

What did your husband do?

**Hawthorn:**

My husband worked at Shell Chemical Company. As I was getting my degree,
he got his degree in chemistry. Then eventually he went into teaching.
He was sort of transitioning between the two around this time.

Anyway, I felt like I had to do something, so I decided to go back and
get a Master’s Degree in computer science at the University of Houston.
That you could do part-time, on your own schedule, and you could still
keep your brain alive. So I started doing that when my first child was
about six months old. Then the second one was born, sixteen months after
the first one. Another six months later—with two kids—the marriage broke
up.

I had to do something, so I went to my professor at the University of
Houston and I said, “I’m going to have to drop out of the Master’s
Program, because my marriage is breaking up and I have to support
myself. I can’t do this.” His name is Steve Sherman. He was always so
careful around all of his students, or maybe it’s just him, but he
absolutely never touched anybody; but he reached across his desk and
touched my arm. He said, “Paula, you have to stay in school. You have a
real future, and you must not drop out now. I’ll help you get
scholarships, get loans, whatever you need; I’ll write you
recommendations; but you must stay in school.”

**Abbate:**

Wow.

**Hawthorn:**

Wow\! Absolutely marvelous. So I thought, “Well, okay, I’ll give it a
try”—because I loved it. I just loved studying computer science. After
having practiced it for three years, to come back and then understand
some of the theory behind things: it was like I’d died and gone to
heaven.

**Abbate:**

So they had a Computer Science Department?

**Hawthorn:**

By that time, they had a Computer Science Department. The University of
Houston had surprisingly good computer facilities, in fact.

I got my Master’s at University of Houston in 1974\. The divorce was
going terribly; my husband was screaming and yelling at me every time we
exchanged kids. I had to get out of Houston. Steve was encouraging me to
get my Ph.D., which I thought was a silly idea. Honestly, the reason I
applied to graduate schools was to get out of Houston. This was a
socially acceptable way to pull my kids out of there and go someplace
else.

In the meantime, my parents had moved from Dallas to Walnut Creek, in
the San Francisco Bay area, just over the hill from here \[Oakland\].
We’d not gotten along that well, but we’d not not gotten along, and I
thought maybe they could be a help. So when the University of California
accepted me, I came out here.

When I got to the University of California at Berkeley, I was absolutely
surprised that it had much worse facilities than the University of
Houston—the “backwater” University of Houston.

**Abbate:**

Really?

**Hawthorn:**

Yes, really\! Computer facilities, classroom facilities, painted
classrooms—you name it. The University—then and even now—has a hard time
convincing the State of California to fund it the way it ought to be
funded. Even now, if you go out on campus, what you see is things that
have been privately given. The University of Houston is funded out of
oil money. It’s that great largesse that happened when they allowed the
leasing of the oil fields in North Texas, and the University of Houston
gets a certain amount of that money. It has always been a beautiful
campus—nice facilities; nice computers; a nice computer center. I was
absolutely amazed \[at the contrast\]. Of course, I spent the first six
months crying when I got here, anyway. You know, you move away from your
family and friends and all that stuff—although my parents were here,
which was really cool.

At the time, the Computer Center was in the basement of Evans Hall. I
wanted to study operating systems, and the way that you study operating
systems is that you run various experiments on computers. I’d done that
at Houston for my Master’s degree. When I got out here, the guy who was
in charge of the operating systems course said, “Oh, yes, we have that.
The time when you can have stand-alone time on the computer is from
twelve at night till three in the morning.” I said, “I’m a single
parent. I can’t do that.” And he said, “Well, you’re just going to have
to arrange for someone to take your kids or something.” Well, my parents
were nice, but not that nice, and I thought, “What am I going to do?” So
I called Steve, and I said, “I think I’m going to have to come home.” He
said, “Don’t do that. There is another guy there. He does database work,
but he has his own computers, and you could run your experiments on his
computers.” I said, “Okay, I’ll try to figure that out.”

That’s when I went and talked to Mike Stonebraker. Mike Stonebraker is a
database professor at Cal. I said, “What I’m interested in is the
low-level operating system stuff.” He said, “Well, that’s really not
much interest to me, but if you’re really good, then we might take you
on.” So I took his course. I did well in his course. I took a bunch of
other courses and did well in a bunch of other courses, and eventually
the guy who was the lead programmer on Mike’s project—Bob Epstein, who
became the founder of Sybase—told Mike Stonebraker that I was doing good
work and to hire me. So that’s how I got onto the INGRES Project.

**Abbate:**

Oh, INGRES. I didn’t realize that you’d done that. I used that.

**Hawthorn:**

Yes. That was how I got onto the INGRES Project, and I then graduated
and got out of there.

But in the midst of all of that, my friend Barbara—have you interviewed
Barbara Simons yet?

**Abbate:**

I’m going to. I haven’t yet.

### Policies Against Women at School

**Hawthorn:**

Barbara and I entered school at the same time, and both of us were
nonstandard. You see, by the time I entered Cal, I was thirty; almost
thirty-one. At Cal they have a person they call your Major Field
Advisor, who is not your research advisor; this is a person who is just
supposed to tell you whether you have enough credits or whatever. And I
walked in to my Major Field Advisor that first day, and I said something
about my kids, and he said, “You have children?” And I said, “Yes.” And
he said, “Well, what does your husband do?” And I said, “It doesn’t
matter, because he’s back in Texas.” And he said, “Well, I would highly
recommend that you drop out, because you aren’t a serious student. You
cannot be a serious student if you have children. You have to
understand, to be a graduate student at UC Berkeley, you have to give up
everything. This has to be your whole life. There is no time for
anything else.”

**Abbate:**

That’s what he said to you?

**Hawthorn:**

That’s what he believed. That’s what he said, and that’s what he
believed. He said, “If we had known that you had children, we would not
have accepted you—because you cannot possibly be a serious student.”

It is still that way at UC Berkeley; you still are not supposed to be
going to school part time. You are still not supposed to have a
full-time job at the same time. “If you want to have a full-time job and
go to school, go to Extension; don’t take the place of a serious
student.” Even at the time that I went there, there was enrollment
pressure; at the time I was there, there were maybe five applicants for
every one position. It’s now up to something like a hundred for every
one, and so there’s this incredible sense of, “Well, if you’re not
making it, then leave. There’s someone else to take your place.” That
was so different than the University of Houston. The University of
Houston is mandated by the state to take everybody, and they just flunk
them out. If you don’t belong, you’re not going to be there next
semester. They just have very, very tough courses, especially freshman
courses. But at UC Berkeley, they only take a certain number.

Anyway, when I got to Berkeley was when I really felt that I was an
incredible minority: as a single parent; as a woman. I walked into a
class—I will never forget: my interest was operating systems, and I
walked into the class, and there were maybe ninety people in that class,
and I swear, I didn’t see another woman\! It turned out there actually
was another woman; she just had her hair short; but the class was
incredibly male. And until then, I had never really felt that. But by
the time I got to Cal, remember, time has marched forward; so by the
time I got to Cal, there were these admittance criteria, and it was
getting harder and harder—I won’t say harder and harder; I’ll say more
restrictive.

When Barbara and I first started, there were a lot of nonstandard women
still getting into the major and graduate school.

**Abbate:**

That was early seventies, at that point?

**Hawthorn:**

Yes, that was the early seventies. And then, by the time we graduated,
the numbers had shot way down. I think it took her the same time as me;
it took me six years to get out; and during that time, the number of
women who were coming in the graduate courses kept getting smaller and
smaller. One year, I even did a little survey: I sent out postcards to
women and asked them, “Why didn’t you accept?” And all of them came back
and said, “Well, we weren’t offered financial aid.” So, I went to the
professors and said, “What happened here?” And the Department got very
defensive, and they said, “Well, we only offered aid to people who met
certain criteria.” None of it was anything other than the de facto
stuff; but a lot of women don’t take four years of mathematics; a lot of
women aren’t motivated so that they do really well in Bachelor’s-level
math and physics; and so forth.

So Barbara and I started this program, which we called the Re-entry
Program. We started working on it when we were still in school, and I
think it took another year after we got out of school before it finally
got approved through the bureaucracy. It was started by Barbara and I
and Sheila Humphreys, who still works at the university; Sheila was at
the Women’s Center at the time. The Re-entry Program was to take women
who had nonstandard degrees—and I always used the example of French
literature: I said, “Some woman has got a degree in French literature,
and now decides she’s going to get a real degree. She has no chance of
getting in at UC Berkeley, but let’s have this program where she can
come in; she can take these courses, which would be the same courses
that undergraduates took; and if she did well in a certain set of
courses, then she could apply—not guaranteed, but apply—to go into
graduate school. (Of course, it turns out Sheila Humphreys has her Ph.D.
in French literature\! \[laughs.\]) But anyway, we got the whole thing
approved; we raised money for it: private money, Ford Foundation money,
some other people; and we got the bureaucracy to accept these students
on the same kind of thing that they did for the Extension: sort of
special student status. And that program went on for maybe twelve or
fifteen years—before Prop 209 was passed.

We had sort of grafted it into the department; a lot of the Professors
didn’t especially think it was necessary or want it. Our main advocate,
Gene Lawler, died of colon cancer; and maybe two years after he died,
Prop 209 was passed; and without Gene there to help push it . . . It
probably would have been illegal anyway under 209\. It’s hard to tell.

**Abbate:**

Now, what does 209 say?

**Hawthorn:**

Oh, Prop 209 was this thing that said that the State Universities can’t
have any race- or gender-based programs.

**Abbate:**

Oh, right\! That was fairly recently?

**Hawthorn:**

Yes, yes. \[Proposition 209 was passed in 1996\.\] And that’s when they
stopped the Re-entry Program. But because of the Re-entry program, we
still have a lot of women who wouldn’t be here otherwise.

We got a lot of women into graduate school, but only maybe five or six
got Ph.D.’s. I had wanted it to be a Ph.D. producer. A lot of women used
it to get a Master’s Degree, to then be able to go out and work. That’s
okay, but I wanted the Ph.D.s. I really want to see more women at the
top, and getting the Ph.D., for a woman, is a wonderful thing to do. It
is instant credibility, and it’s credibility that is well deserved,
because you really do know something. So I always wanted to have more
women who were at the Ph.D. level. The Re-entry Program didn’t do it for
us, and I don’t know what would do it for us. Women are still, at Cal,
at about ten percent of the graduating class.

**Abbate:**

Of Ph.D.’s, you mean?

**Hawthorn:**

Ph.D.’s, yes.

**Abbate:**

Yes, I think that’s about average.

**Hawthorn:**

Yes, yes. It has not changed. And I got my degree a long time ago:
sixteen, twenty years ago.

**Abbate:**

That was interesting, your comment about credibility. Do you have a
sense that if you have a Ph.D.—I guess if you’re going on just
subjective criteria, it’s easy to have conscious or unconscious
discrimination against women; but if you have something where you could
say, “Well I have a Ph.D.,” does that counteract that tendency?

**Hawthorn:**

I think it absolutely does.

**Abbate:**

Gives you something more objective to go on?

**Hawthorn:**

I think it does. And especially someone like me. You know, I’ve always
been this little round person, and I had a Southern accent for a long
time (I managed to gradually lose it). I don’t believe I have a demeanor
that is especially . . .

**Abbate:**

Commanding?

**Hawthorn:**

Or, you know, like Anita Borg. You just look at that woman and think,
“This is a brilliant woman.” Me: I was often mistaken as the janitor\!
I’m not kidding. I’d be in in the middle of the night; I’d be walking
around, carrying my keys in my hands, in blue jeans; and someone would
say, “Well, have you looked at that bathroom over here?” \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

They had female janitors?

**Hawthorn:**

Yes. That was at the University of Houston, I think. Cleaning people,
whatever.

And you never know whether it is that other people view you differently,
or that you simply view yourself differently, and therefore you’re
projecting differently; but I had that Ph.D., and for me, it simply
opened up the world. Everyone—all of my friends—had told me that trying
to get a Ph.D. from UC Berkeley with two small children was setting
myself up for failure; that I was trying to be superwoman; and also that
it wouldn’t pay off. There is that theory that the time that you spend
going to school, if you instead were out making money, that you would be
making more money than you would ever get if you got the degree. But for
me, I loved it. I loved being in school. I loved having the freedom to
raise my children on my time schedule, not that of an employer. I
personally think that having kids and being in school is just a
wonderful combination.

**Abbate:**

How did you manage the child care?

**Hawthorn:**

One of those wonderful gifts from God was the student housing. They had
two student housing facilities at Cal. I didn’t know that you had to
apply for student housing before you were even accepted to Cal. I came;
my parents were in Walnut creek, and we camped out at my parents’ house.
My two little boys were two and four at the time. I drove from Texas
with my boys in the back seat of my car, hauling a five-by-twelve U-Haul
trailer with “Adventure In Moving” on the back. It was\! Anyway, I came
to the housing office and I said, “I’m a single parent, and I have two
children, and I’d like to be in student housing.” And they just looked
at me and said, “Well, you know the waiting list is ever so long.” So I
just broke down and cried: “Oh my God, what am I going to do?” And so
this dear lovely woman says, “Well, here, hon, let me show you; there is
this one place.” And it turned out I could get a place in the student
housing where they had a day-care center\! I didn’t know that they even
had a day-care center; but they had a day-care center. Years later, I
met someone from the Student Housing Department, and I was telling her
how I got in, and she said, “Wait a minute: and then you cried.” And I
said: “Yes,” and she said “Sally did that all the time\!” \[laughs.\]
“All anybody had to do was cry. She just always did that\!”
\[laughs.\] There was this great woman in Student Housing who would bump
up people who were distressed.

So there was—and still is—a day-care center there; and the day-care
center there was very low cost, partly subsidized by the state at the
time. So I could have my kids in the day-care center from eight in the
morning until five in the afternoon. That’s what I did: I put them in
from eight until five, no matter what my course schedule was, and then
the rest of the time I used to work. You know, it isn’t a life where you
can hang out in coffee shops or bars or whatever; I didn’t do a lot of
the sitting around and drinking with the graduate students. It was like
a job: you go at eight; you come back at five, get the kids. The nice
thing was, if a kid was sick, I didn’t have to explain to an employer
what I was doing. And then I’d feed the kids dinner, and then I’d put
them to bed, and then I’d study some more. Of course, there were times
when I would set all the clocks ahead, so that they would think it was
later, so I could get them to bed earlier, so I could get more studying
done\! \[laughs.\] But for the most part, it sort of worked\! It sort of
worked.

**Abbate:**

That’s so progressive, that they had a day-care center. Was that just
graduate student housing?

**Hawthorn:**

No\! It was mostly undergraduates; not a lot of graduate students. And
in fact, right in the middle of it all, they decided that they were not
going to take the graduate students. They were partly funded out of
welfare money, and they decided that we graduate students couldn’t
qualify, and so they weren’t going to take our kids. And that was one of
the times—I mean, at least once a year I had to go and fight for
something. For that one, I had to go in and I just had my own little
private sit-in. I was good at sit-ins, anyway\! I had my own little
private sit-in at the Director’s office, to say that I have to do this.
And that was when my Major Field Advisor—the same one who had said, “You
should just leave, or get your husband to take these children”—he was
still my Major Field Advisor, and he wrote this very polite letter
saying that I was totally unemployable unless I got my Ph.D. \[laughs\],
so I could keep my kids in this day-care center\!

**Abbate:**

That’s funny\!

**Hawthorn:**

And then the way I supported myself is: my ex-husband sent me two
hundred dollars a month for child care, and I promised him if he would
just keep sending the money and not screw around with it, that as soon
as I graduated and got a job, he would never have to pay child care
again. And then if he didn’t, I would kill him\! \[laughs.\] It was just
that clear\! I still actually celebrate every birthday with the fact
that I never killed my ex-husband. \[laughs.\]

So he paid the child care, almost always, and then I had loans, and then
either Teaching Assistant money or my Research Assistantship. And we
made it. We got through. We didn’t have a lot. My son Andrew was telling
me he can still remember the taste of reconstituted dried milk—you know,
at the end of the month, when you run out of money, you always had the
non-fat dried milk. So he can remember things like that. But they loved
student housing; they really liked it. Even now, if you go over to the
UC Berkeley Student Housing—it’s there off of San Pablo, down near
Albany—they have the ones that are in quadrangles, and so the kids can
play in the middle. Ours was actually sort of a triangle. The kids would
play in the middle, and the parents could watch from the windows and
keep an eye on the kids. They just had the best time. It was a really
nice sort of communal sort of place. It was a cool place to grow up.

### After Graduation

**Hawthorn:**

Of course, when I graduated and I said, “Well, you know, that was nice,
but I think what I’d really like to do is get a Ph.D. in civil
engineering,” they nearly killed me\! \[laughs.\] They said, “Mom, no\!
Not anymore.” But by that time, my second husband, Michael, had moved
in. We moved in together when I finished school, so by that time we had
more people in the family—and a dog, because he came with the dog.

**Abbate:**

You really wanted to go into civil engineering?

**Hawthorn:**

Oh, I would love to build bridges. I think the Golden Gate Bridge is the
most wonderful thing in the world. I think building bridges would be
really cool. Would I really do it? No. I’ve had it. What I’m doing right
now is a little consulting, a lot of keeping the grandkids and working
in the garden and just nothing. But I really think the science of
building bridges has got to be marvelous.

**Abbate:**

So you saw the Golden Gate Bridge and thought, “Gee . . . “

**Hawthorn:**

Actually, there’s this book about how they built it. It’s just an
amazing book\! It’s an amazing piece of engineering. It’s neat. I like
bridges in general; I like them all. They’re all fun.

Anyway: I graduated in 1979\. When you graduate from UC, they put your
name and resume, if you want them to, in this book of people who are
graduating. As soon as they did that, I started getting these phone
calls, and that’s when I realized that getting my Ph.D. under Mike
Stonebraker on the INGRES Project was like having minted gold. I had my
choice. I could do anything I wanted to.

I worked for Hewlett-Packard for a while, and then Bob Epstein and my
husband, Mike Ubell, and I went to work for a little start-up that made
a database machine: Britton-Lee.

**Abbate:**

Let me back up a little bit. So you did your dissertation on databases:
was there a particular problem you were focusing on?

**Hawthorn:**

Oh, yes: hardware for assisting the performance of database systems.
Special-purpose hardware for database systems. David DeWitt at the
University of Wisconsin had come up with an idea for a database machine,
and I read his paper and I liked it. Stonebraker couldn’t stand it. My
thesis was actually on performance evaluation of several different
database machines—versus just the plain software, INGRES, with no
assists—to see in what cases one was better than another. And there were
workload characteristics such that special-purpose hardware would make a
lot of difference in the performance of a database system. Stonebraker
always said, “Okay, that’s true for now; but just wait until
general-purpose machines get faster.” And I said, “But you can always
make special-purpose hardware faster, too.”

It turned out I was wrong. But we had this company, Britton-Lee, where
we tried making our own special-purpose hardware for databases. The idea
keeps coming back. By the way, it’s back again; there are some people
who are working on special-purpose hardware for database systems. But in
general, what happens is that the general-purpose hardware runs faster
than you can run a special-purpose thing—because you’ve got more people
working on the general-purpose hardware, and you’ve got economy of scale
and that kind of stuff. But we spent several years trying to make
Britton-Lee a success. Bob left to form Sybase, and I became Vice
President of Engineering at Britton-Lee, and that’s what I’ve been ever
since: Vice President of Development for start-ups. That’s what I do.

**Abbate:**

So HP was the only non–start-up that you worked for ?

**Hawthorn:**

Yes. I actually went to HP twice: I went to HP in the beginning, and
then in the middle of the Britton-Lee thing I went back to HP for a
while; I came back twice.

Oh, I also worked for Lawrence Berkeley Lab. That’s what I wanted to
tell you about: I worked for Lawrence Berkeley Lab straight out of
school. That’s right. I went to school, LBL, then HP, then Britton-Lee,
then HP.

### Women's Activism at Companies

At Lawrence Berkeley Lab—and everywhere I’ve gone—I’ve always formed
women’s groups; ever since I got to Cal. It was so nice: we started this
Women in Computer Science group at Cal, and we would—I think it was on
Friday noons—get together a brown-bag lunch in the student lounge and
just tell stories. There would be things that would happen. There was a
Professor who was over-friendly: “How do I handle this? What do I do
about this?” I think with any minority group—maybe any group, but
certainly a minority group—you need a chance to sit around and compare
how you’re feeling, test it out. “Am I crazy, or . . . ?” You know: “I’m
working on the computer, and this guy just drapes his arm over me and
drapes himself over me. What am I supposed to do?” How do you handle
that? Giving each other tips on that kind of stuff; plus, just to be
among women. I mean, sometimes we’d walk into those classes and they
would be all men. It was nice to relax, and be among other women.

Barbara and I started that one; and then I went to LBL, and there hadn’t
been a women’s group, so I started a women’s group there. Then I went to
Hewlett-Packard; there had been a women’s group, but it had been sort of
shut down by the management, but I started it again, because I was a
manager at that time. Stuff like that. The one at Hewlett-Packard that
had been sort of shut down: some of the women in the group had decided
to make it a—I want to use the word “offensive” . . .

**Abbate:**

“Militant”?

**Hawthorn:**

Yes, yes.

**Abbate:**

And that’s why the management . . . ?

**Hawthorn:**

. . . just felt that it was a diversion for women.

You know, there was a woman—I wish I remembered her name: She gave a
talk at Mills College when Lenore Blum was at Mills, and in the talk
that she gave, she said that she or someone had done these studies that
had found that the perception of discrimination is as bad as the
discrimination itself. So if someone says to you, “You did a lousy job
on that report,” and you think it’s because you’re a woman, you can’t
possibly grow from the criticism. And how are you going to know the
difference? How are you ever going to know the difference? And that’s
why, sitting in a women’s group, you can say, “Well, my boss Jack did
this, and he just discriminates against women,” and if it’s a good
group, someone else can say, “Absolutely. That happened to me,” or
someone else can say, “You know what? You might take a second look at
that report. I read it too. I don’t know that that’s his problem.” You
know, to help give you a grounding there, because sometimes you don’t
know.

It is true that the women that are the most successful are those who
absolutely do not believe that they are discriminated against. Barbara
and I used to call them the “My Daddy Was An Engineer” women. That was
why we never wanted to join SWE, the Society of Women Engineers: there
were so many engineers in SWE whose daddies were engineers, who felt
that there was absolutely no issue with them being a woman in
engineering, and that anyone who talked about anyone being discriminated
against was just making it up\!

**Abbate:**

Having a father in engineering just gave them the confidence that they
needed to do it?

**Hawthorn:**

Actually, I think there have even been studies around that; and the fact
that my father loved the mathematician in me is yet another example. I
think there have even been these studies that have said that for women
entering non-traditional, male-dominated fields, to have their fathers
be very supportive of that gave them the confidence to do it. I mean,
here’s your earliest male figure, who’s saying, “It’s fine. Of course
you can be an engineer; you can be anything you want to be.” And so what
if this other guy you meet when you’re twenty-two puts you down? I even
witnessed it one time, when this guy was saying something that a woman
should have just been totally pissed off about; and instead she goes,
“Pff\! He was just kidding.” She blew it off; totally blew it off. My
husband, who’s Jewish, has never heard an anti-Semitic comment in his
life. Do you believe that? No: he just blows it off. “They must be
kidding. Of course not.” He’s the best-grounded person I’ve ever met. “I
don’t see it; I don’t hear it; so it doesn’t bother me.”

In the women’s groups, when you get together, you talk about it. The
ones who hear it are saying, “Those women are not doing themselves a
service by refusing to agree that this exists, because it does exist.”
And you say, “Well, maybe; maybe not\! Maybe it’s a good thing to ignore
it.” Who knows? I don’t.

**Abbate:**

A thick skin can be a blessing.

**Hawthorn:**

Yes; and that well-grounded attitude of “They must be kidding.” Or,
“That guy’s an asshole anyway. Why would I listen to him?”

Anyway: I started this women’s group at Lawrence Berkeley Lab.

**Abbate:**

How did you end up at the Lab?

**Hawthorn:**

They were hiring at the time that I was graduating, and Mike was still
in school, and LBL is right off the campus, so I said, “I want to go
here\!” \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

Did it seem exciting?

**Hawthorn:**

Yes. They weren’t doing quite the research that I wanted to do, on the
hardware for database machines, which is why I left and went to
Britton-Lee: to make a database machine. But they had—still have—a
really good Computer Science group there.

When I got there, there were a large number of women who had been
computer scientists there from early times: women who had no formal
training in computer science, who were being slowly edged out. Part of
it was that they had been programmers on the CDC machines, and those
machines were being replaced by [UNIX](/UNIX "UNIX") and VMS on DEC
machines, and they needed to change their skills. They needed to learn
programming in this new environment. These were people who had done
programming with punched cards, and now it’s all interactive, and there
are all sorts of new skills there that they needed to learn. They didn’t
have time to learn, because their current jobs were very demanding, and
so their skills were getting very rusty for the new things. So when I
say “edged out,” I mean literally they were of a previous generation,
and they weren’t moving forward. Part of what we were doing—the Women’s
Group—was to try to encourage them to do something, other than to feel
betrayed.

It didn’t end well. At LBL there are periodically layoffs, due to
changes in administration in Washington. That was actually the last time
that I didn’t vote Democratic: I voted for the Peace and Freedom Party.
But Reagan won, and he gutted the Department of Energy funding, and they
laid off a bunch of those women.

**Abbate:**

I didn’t realize. I mean, he built up the defense budget; I didn’t
realize he’d taken away from DOE.

**Hawthorn:**

I forget why they didn’t like DOE. They were going to shut it down for
some reason. I forget all of the politics, but I do remember that they
did lay off a bunch of those women. That’s the last time I ever said
there was no difference between a Democrat and a Republican, and voted
something else\! \[laughs.\] Not again\! Not ever again.

### Working For Startups

**Hawthorn:**

Anyway: I was at LBL, and then Britton-Lee. It was sort of a failure, it
was sort of a success. It lasted for twelve years; I didn’t stay that
long. But it wasn’t a resounding success; and when Mike and I joined
Britton-Lee, we did not know to bargain. Women are notoriously bad at
bargaining anyway. But the fact that you bargained for stock was
something we didn’t learn until Britton-Lee went public, and we saw all
the stock that other people had, and we said, “Why didn’t we get that
much?” Dave Britton says, “You didn’t ask\!”

**Abbate:**

That was the mid-eighties when you started there?

**Hawthorn:**

I’ll get a resume and send it to you, so we can nail down the dates.

**Abbate:**

But I guess before stock options became a household word.

**Hawthorn:**

Oh, yes. I didn’t know anybody who worked for a start-up.

**Abbate:**

Was that a bit adventurous, to leave a normal, steady job and join a
start-up?

**Hawthorn:**

Oh, it’s so much fun\! It always is so much fun. And it was my husband
and I working together—we’d worked together as graduate students on the
INGRES Project—and working with Bob Epstein, who had also on the INGRES
Project; so it was comfortable.

They were paying us. If at any point they had stopped paying us, I would
have quit, and I could get another job in a day.

**Abbate:**

So it didn’t feel risky.

**Hawthorn:**

It was not a risk. I never felt it was a risk. Until this recession, I
have never felt that start-ups were risks. If you have the right skills,
you never are going to be without a job—except for now, when I know a
lot of people with the right skills who are out of jobs. But for years
and years programmers, especially, were in such high demand. Then I was
always in high demand, because not only am I a programmer, but I am also
a good manager, and articulate; and those things together are a hard
combination to get.

### Management Skills

**Abbate:**

Was your first management job at HP?

**Hawthorn:**

No, LBL. I went to LBL first, and I wasn’t actually a Manager, but I was
moved into an Assistant Director position there—because I tend to tell
people what to do anyway\! \[laughs.\] But then I went to HP and was a
manager at HP.

**Abbate:**

And that just came naturally to you?

**Hawthorn:**

Yes. I think if you look at the children of alcoholics, the thing that
we get is the ability to organize, very early; because we have been
organizing our parents’ lives. The children of abusive alcoholics—which
my mother was when she was drunk—tend to be very sensitive to
interpersonal things. You have to learn at a very early age how to read
someone: “Is she okay? Is she not okay? Should I get out of this room?
What should I do?” The thing that you got from it—the thing that I
got—is that I am an extraordinarily good organizer, and I do it
automatically. When I was working at Texaco, I had a friend who would
every once in a while have to go home because her cattle dogs had gotten
out and were rounding up the neighbors’ cattle. Well, that’s me\!
\[laughs.\] I just do it\! It’s just fun. I just do it: start organizing
people and managing people.

So I think I gravitated to it naturally. Also, I complain a lot if
things aren’t going right, and what you complain about, you get to fix.
Also, remember I was older, and so immediately people would see this
older woman and say, “You can help us with this.” And then there’s a lot
of caring earth-mother kind of stuff. At Britton-Lee, in the middle of a
big celebration, Dave Britton says, “And this is our earth-mother,
Paula\!” All of the women—by that time, of course, we were all
sensitized, and all the women in the Group were going, “Ssssssss\!” And
I said, “It’s all right. It’s really all right.” A couple of engineers
had even called me “Mom,” before I was old enough to be their mother.
But yes: it came naturally, and I like it. I like managing people. I
love start-ups.

### Moving from Company to Company

After I left—Britton-Lee was going down—I went back to Hewlett-Packard,
and that was when I went to Illustra. Mike Stonebraker was starting
Illustra and asked me if I wanted to be VP Engineering, and I said, “I
don’t know,” because I was happy at Hewlett-Packard. But there’s nothing
like a start-up, so we did Illustra. That went very well. Then Illustra
got bought by Informix, and I stayed at Informix for sixteen months. I
don’t like big companies that much.

**Abbate:**

What was Illustra producing?

**Hawthorn:**

A database system.

**Abbate:**

It was the hardware, or was it just software?

**Hawthorn:**

No, it was all software. I never did hardware again after Britton-Lee.
Stonebraker—darn him\!—was right. \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

Temporarily, anyway\!

**Hawthorn:**

Well, I think for always. I think special-purpose hardware will always
have a hard time keeping up with general-purpose.

So this was a Stonebraker company. INGRES was the first generation of
database system that was his research at UC Berkeley. The next
generation was POSTGRES, and this was the commercialization of POSTGRES.
It is a relational database system where you could have objects embedded
within the system. So we called it an Object-Relational Database System.
It was the most fun ever\! We had the greatest President, and the VP
Marketing was a marvelous guy, and my husband was the Chief Scientist;
and Stonebraker was the CTO. A marvelous team that we worked with. It
was just the most wonderful thing.

We built it up, and it was great, and we decided to go ahead—they
decided; it’s not like anyone had a choice, other than the Board—they
decided to sell it to Informix; and we certainly agreed, because we
thought it would be a perfect marriage with Informix. It wasn’t a
perfect marriage with Informix. Informix was cooking the books and
misrepresenting their business, and so right after they bought us—within
a year after they bought us—this whole house of cards came down. I still
don’t know why those guys aren’t in jail. It was like we had this train,
and we had these tracks, and we were going forward—and then everything
fell in, and the tracks got ripped out, and the train stopped.

**Abbate:**

Did they go out of business?

**Hawthorn:**

No, but they eventually got sold. IBM bought what was left of the
business.

**Abbate:**

And your system: was it actually commercialized?

**Hawthorn:**

No, I think it disappeared. IBM was a competitor of ours; they were
doing something similar; and I think a lot of the ideas disappeared into
the IBM system. Too bad\! But Informix bought us, and we made a lot of
money off of it; and I took my part of that money and salted it away, so
that I really don’t have to work, if we don’t live extravagantly. It’s
not a huge amount of money, but if we don’t spend a lot—which we
don’t—then it’s enough. So it’s okay; it was okay.

So I did that, and I had that money, and I didn’t really have to work.
But then there’s a thought of, “But do you really want to retire?” So
next I took another job, and that job was at Andromedia. Andromedia was
another start-up, and this was absolutely a challenge: to go into a
start-up which had already been there and get the engineering team
making schedules and delivering quality product on time. Anybody can
have an idea, and anybody can hack together a prototype, but can you
really produce a product out of it? I worked with them for a year, and
then they got bought by Macromedia. I took my stock options, bought a
house up a coast with it, and since then I’ve been just consulting. I’m
doing the same thing as at Andromedia, for people with start-ups where
they have a team that is doing okay; I come in and help them with
schedules and with articulating what they have and how to get it to
market, and making sure that they know what they’re doing as far as
getting a quality product out.

**Abbate:**

So you take them from the brilliant idea to a functioning . . .

**Hawthorn:**

They’re always in the middle of that anyway, and all I ever do is just
assist them. I always say, “My dog could do it\!” I mean, all you’re
doing is, you’re just sitting there going, “Yes; yes; and now what?” and
making sure that people are thinking about what they need to do. “Okay,
if I have a schedule that says that this product is going to be done by
this time, do I have QA people to work on it? When do they need to
start?” None of it is rocket science. It’s all in books; lots of good
books have been written about project management and software management
and all that stuff. It’s just that with a lot of the start-ups,
especially during the boom, they weren’t paying attention to basics.
More are now.

So I’ve been doing consulting, and that has tapered off since the
recession started, and I haven’t minded. It’s just nice to do other
stuff.

### Work With Non-Profits

**Abbate:**

Now, you’ve also been active in the ACM? I know you’ve been on
committees.

**Hawthorn:**

Yes. I always have something going on with some group. With the ACM, I
was on the Lawler Award Committee. I still am. Gene Lawler, the guy who
died of colon cancer at the age of forty-something; wonderful Professor
at Cal. We made an award in his name for humanitarian contributions
using computers in some way.

**Abbate:**

That’s interesting.

**Hawthorn:**

It is. Yes, it is. It’s a fun thing. Get Barbara \[Simons\] to tell you
about it. She’s the Chair of the Committee, and it was actually her
idea, anyway, to have the Lawler Award.

So I was doing that; and now there’s this new affirmative action
program. When Prop 209 was passed, the anti-affirmative action bill,
they stopped all these programs at Cal. I’m on the Industrial Advisory
Board for the EECS Department at Cal, and the members of the Board said,
“Well, we should have some extracurricular, off-campus support for these
kinds of programs; private support.” So we started the Berkeley
Foundation for Opportunities in Information Technology, and raised money
privately, and are doing quite a bit, actually. We hired a nice Director
for it, and he’s got a summer program, which starts in a couple of
weeks, where we bring in twenty-five kids from the ghetto, basically,
and expose them to computers on campus. The whole idea is to get them on
campus and let people see that there is a possibility here. It sounds
trivial, but it’s really effective to bring people on campus and let
them know that professors are people. We bring in professors of color to
talk with them and try to get people’s aspirations up.

**Abbate:**

Yes, it’s hard to imagine even doing it if you haven’t been exposed to
people like yourself who have done it.

**Hawthorn:**

BFOIT, the Berkeley Foundation for Opportunities in Information
Technology, helps to underline the program centers back at Cal that help
all the students, but that some of the disadvantaged students may not
know about. There have been lots of studies showing that children from
advantaged families are used to looking around and finding
resources—”Are there tutors around to help?”—whereas disadvantaged
students aren’t as aware of the kind of support that you can get at
school. So we try to help them do that, and then to connect them with
potential employers, and help with making the bridge to find summer
internships—that kind of thing, to keep people in until they graduate.
It’s a full program.

**Abbate:**

And how has that worked out?

**Hawthorn:**

It’s okay. Again, as with the Re-entry Program, I can’t say that we have
hundreds of people who have benefited: it’s more like three or four;
small amounts. We get a lot of students in the Summer Program, but
getting into Cal is a different matter. It’s hard to get into Cal;
there’s a lot of enrollment pressure at Cal; and if you are good
enough to get into Cal, you’re good enough to get into Stanford—and if
you get into Stanford, Stanford guarantees your funding for the full
four years. Cal can’t; it’s not something they would do. So, which place
would you go? \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

But then it would still be a success, in the sense that if they got into
Stanford, that’s certainly . . .

**Hawthorn:**

Yes, that’s right. And it’s only been going on for a couple years, so we
don’t have that yet. The problem is that there aren’t enough kids who
are good enough to get into Cal who don’t go to other schools, so we
tend to have a low number of minority students at Cal—partly, I think,
because of the fact that we can’t fund them like the private schools.

**Abbate:**

Is it just California residents that Stanford funds, or everybody?

**Hawthorn:**

Everybody. If you get in at Stanford and you can’t afford to go, then
they will certainly help you go. That’s the commitment that Stanford
makes. So they don’t admit you unless they intend to help with the
funding if you need it. It’s all a part of the admission thing. I think
in a sense you’re applying for financial aid at the same time that you
apply for admission. But I’m not an expert on Stanford. Barbara would
know more, since she’s teaching there.

**Abbate:**

So the actual student population at Berkeley: Is that still mainly white
men, then?

**Hawthorn:**

And Asian. I taught there a year ago, and I was astounded at how Asian
it is. It’s very Asian. My own feeling is that for years they had an
informal cap on the number of Asians, and then with Prop 209, and
everything being based on merit, the Asian children—who, for various
reasons, are always pushed by their parents to succeed more—have been
admitted to that school in large numbers. I was teaching this class:
there were a hundred and twenty people in the class, and that class was
probably three-quarters Asian. A large number of Asian students, and my
T.A.’s are all Asian. I was sitting there talking with them, and I said,
“Boy, there’s this man in the class, and he is just brilliant\!” And
they said, “Well who is it?” I said, “I don’t know his name”—because
it’s this big lecture hall, and I’m not good with names anyway, and we
certainly don’t have seating charts—I said, “He’s this tall Asian guy in
the second row.” And they laughed, and they said, “Paula, you have just
described most of the people in the class\!” \[laughs.\] I thought with
having more Asians that we would also have more women, because Asian
women don’t tend to have the gender issues that Caucasian women do when
it comes to math and computer science, and there were a few more women;
but it still wasn’t the numbers I would have expected.

But yes: at least in the Computer Science Department. And it’s all kinds
of Asians.

**Abbate:**

You mean Indian, Chinese, . . .

**Hawthorn:**

I wasn’t specifically thinking of Indian, because I think of them as
Indian; but Chinese, and Taiwanese, and Vietnamese, and Filipino; people
from all over, just an amazing number of people.

**Abbate:**

Are they Asian-American or Asian Asian?

**Hawthorn:**

The majority, of course, are Asian-American, because Cal does have
quotas on who they will accept from overseas. But still there are also a
lot of overseas Asians there as well. I admire them. I mean, imagine
learning a language as different as this one is, and doing well, and
coming here: it’s just an amazing thing.

Anything else I can tell you?

### Joys of Computing

**Abbate:**

Oh yes, I have a few general questions.

What do you find most satisfying about your work with computers?

**Hawthorn:**

There’s two answers to that. First of all, in my work with computers
themselves, doing programming: for me, it was the sense of
accomplishment. Doing it, and solving the problem, and making this
computer do what you want it to do, and producing something that people
usefully use\! Even as a manager—even as a Vice President and no longer
programming, never getting my hands directly into code—there is no
better sense of satisfaction than walking into a workplace and finding
someone using this tool that you made—and using it effectively\! Our
little database machine, the Britton-Lee machine, was this fast machine
that you used with a VAX as a front end. There was a guy in Texas who
was way behind on a project and had promised it for a certain amount of
money to a customer. So he bought one of our machines and attached it to
this VAX that was underperforming, and now he’s able to do this project
really fast. It saved his job. So he named his daughter Brittany Lee\!
\[laughs.\] I’m not kidding\! There’s nothing better, absolutely nothing
better. Imagine having such an effect\! That little machine: I actually
was on a road show with Illustra at one point, and I went over to
Goldman-Sachs, and they said, “Oh, we’ve still got our Britton-Lee
machine in the basement\!” You know, that’s just fun. Programs that I
wrote at Texaco were still running ten, fifteen years later. It’s just
neat to build things. I mean, it is an engineering science, in that you
build something, and people use it\! You can’t see it like you can see a
bridge, but you still use it, and that’s just a really fun thing.

So that’s the work with the computers. The satisfying part of the
management work, of course, is finding what people are good at, putting
them in those roles, and watching them be good at it. It’s just the best
thing in the world. Of course, it’s easy if you get there, and you hire
this person, and they’re very good at doing what you hired them to do.
That’s the easy stuff, and then you just reward them and that’s fine.
But at least half the time, you find someone, you hire them, and it
turns out that the thing you hired them to do, they’re not quite the
right person for. So now you’re looking around wondering, “Okay, what
else would this person be good at?” Moving them into other roles, and
getting them other things, so that you’re maximally exploiting their
talents, and making them feel like they’re maximally exploiting their
talents. It’s such a buzz. I mean, it’s just really a great thing.

Getting products out on time. Promising you’ll do something, and a year
and a half later, really having it done: boy\! That is really cool\!
Just a lot of fun. There’s nothing better.

### Obstacles to Women in Computing

**Abbate:**

I’m curious: do you find that women end up in certain areas of computer
science?

**Hawthorn:**

You bet\!

**Abbate:**

I haven’t found many who did hardware like you have.

**Hawthorn:**

Exactly. Right, right. And I didn’t actually do the hardware; I just
managed people who were building the hardware. You bet. Isn’t that
interesting? The more you go toward the humanities side—human-computer
interaction; Web design; those kinds of things—lots of women there. The
more you progress toward the hardware, fewer and fewer women, down at
the hardware level. The only thing we’ve ever thought of that accounts
for that is just that the more you go toward the hardware, the more like
engineering it is, and the more my nineteen-year-old response to my
engineering Professor—”Girls don’t do engineering”—the more that comes
in. That’s what I think.

**Abbate:**

So you think it’s more internal than external?

**Hawthorn:**

I do. I think the days of people overtly telling women they can’t do it
are gone, but I think there’s a lot of the internal stuff. I don’t
know\! You know, my granddaughter is four years old, and even at four,
she is so gender-specific it’s unbelievable\! This is a little girl, and
it’s clearly a little girl. She doesn’t want to wear blue jeans; she
wants to wear her dress. Her mommy only packed one dress for the week?
So we wash it every day\! Because she wants to wear her dress. “I want
my dress, Grandma\! I want my pretty dress.” I think it’s just amazing.
It’s true: you walk into a hardware class and there are just no women.

**Abbate:**

Did you read that Carnegie-Mellon study that came out this spring?

**Hawthorn:**

Oh, I don’t know.

**Abbate:**

It’s called Unlocking the Clubhouse. It’s kind of interesting, because
it starts from childhood and talks about various things, and then
there’s a study of actual students at Carnegie-Mellon, and it actually
sounds kind of forbidding\! That even today, a woman majoring in CS at
Carnegie-Mellon would find it fairly hostile—there was overt hostility
from male students, and things like that.

**Hawthorn:**

Oh yes? That’s right; that’s why I didn’t read it. \[laughs.\] There was
one that was done at MIT earlier, along the same lines. Of course,
you’re always going to find those things.

**Abbate:**

Probably the more competitive the school, the worse it would be.

**Hawthorn:**

Yes, probably so. Although I think a lot is also just what’s tolerated
by the school itself. I think part of the women’s group and what we did
at Cal was just to really sensitize people. I mean I don’t think that
you run into as many problems at Cal; probably some. Every once in a
while, I will go in and sit in at the Women in Computer Science meeting,
and I think, “I’m not seeing anything worse than when I was there,”
which is occasional harassment, more than anything else.

**Abbate:**

Do you think the culture of computing has changed?

**Hawthorn:**

No\! \[laughs.\] No. During the boom, it was definitely different; but
that’s over.

**Abbate:**

More business-oriented, you mean?

**Hawthorn:**

No. During the boom times, when anybody and everybody could get a job,
then the culture had definitely changed, and it was much less
business-oriented and much more “I’ve got the macho idea here; I know
what I’m doing; don’t tell me what to do.” I found there were far more
prima donnas at that point, young men who were rich beyond their wildest
dreams—in stock options that they couldn’t cash in, because they had
handcuffs, and by the time they could cash them in they were worth
pennies. There is a book one could write. Oh man, it was just
devastating for a lot of people. But also, a lot of us felt that people
got their comeuppance during that time, because there was entirely too
much arrogance. “I have an idea; I don’t need a business plan.” Someone
said that to me\! \[laughs.\] Really\! And in fact, people had put money
behind him. This was this really smart guy who knew about computers, and
everybody was putting money into computers, so he got a lot of money to
do his thing and didn’t have a business plan. “We don’t need business
plans\!” \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

Apparently, one of the Professors in the Business School at the
University of Maryland, where I’m affiliated, is making an archive of
business plans of failed dot-coms.

**Hawthorn:**

Is that right? \[laughs.\]

**Abbate:**

I think it would be very entertaining reading. I just heard about that,
but I will look that up when I get back and see. Cautionary tales. On
the bright side, if you’re twenty-four, you can start over again.

**Hawthorn:**

Oh, sure\! And they are. That’s right; absolutely. A lot of them are. A
lot of them are unemployed, too, which is too bad, but . . .

So, no: I don’t think that much of the culture has changed at all. In
fact, it disappoints me that it hasn’t changed that much. Today I go
into a company where there are a bunch of programmers, and they’re using
tools that are not that different from the tools that we were using
fifteen years ago; they are using processes that are not that much
different; they are producing code that has about as many bugs. That’s
one reason that I’m not working that much: I find it boring\!
\[laughs.\] It’s all the same.

**Abbate:**

Were you hoping it would be different?

**Hawthorn:**

Absolutely\! I mean, we all wanted . . . Look at how much faster the
computers are\! Look at how the hardware has improved\! Look at
everything\! I wanted the women’s movement to move forward so much more
quickly. I did not want my granddaughter, age four, to say to me,
“Grandma, girls wear lipstick”, and for me to say, “No, Sydney, I
don’t wear makeup,” and for her to look at me and say, “But Grandma,
you have to. You’re a girl\!” This is my four-year-old\! No\! for the
civil rights movement, it progressed. I went back to Houston, to a
wedding of a friend of mine and her new husband—he was black, she was
white—and they had it at this mansion that you could rent, where I am
absolutely certain that if the original builders of the mansion had
known of such a thing, they would have burned it down\! You know what I
mean? I mean, this was in Houston. We had an interracial couple in
Houston, Texas, getting married, with a completely interracial set of
friends and families, and everything was fine\! No one had to put a
guard on the door. We have moved so fast\! Oh, I’m not saying that it’s
perfect, but we have moved so fast. With women we have not moved that
fast.

With the processes around developing software, we haven’t moved fast at
all. It’s still the same. When I first stopped working, I started
looking at software engineering, to try to see if there is a better way.

**Abbate:**

I noticed you’re on the ACM Advisory Panel on Professional Licensing in
Software Engineering.

**Hawthorn:**

Yes, yes. But there’s nothing. The things that people are recommending
that people do to change processes and all of that: none of it is really
taking with the community—and there’s a reason for that. It isn’t that
the community is stupid; it’s that there’s nothing that’s really working
very well—well enough that people will take it up and say, “Oh, yes;
I’ll do this.” Little bits of progress here and there, but not much.

So things have not changed, unfortunately. Computers have gotten faster.
You no longer have 36-hour turnaround time\! \[laughs.\]

### Advice for Women

**Abbate:**

Do you have any advice for young women who are thinking of going into
computing today?

**Hawthorn:**

Oh, to do it\! To absolutely do it\! I still think, of all the fields
open to women, computer science is the most wonderful one. First of all,
as a programmer, no one knows what sex you are, what color you are, what
your gender preferences are; they just know: Does it work or not? Did
you get it done? Is it fast enough? And therefore, it is the field where
you are judged by the output—that’s it. That’s all. It’s not someone’s
subjective anything. It’s very objective: Did it work? Does it do what
it’s supposed to do? So I love it for women. And I would absolutely
ignore anyone who was at all discouraging, because there are lots of
people who say, “Oh, you can’t do this” or “You can’t do that.” Do it\!
It’s fun\!

I also like management. A lot of women shy away from management, because
they want to have families, and they feel that you can’t have a family
and be a manager. But you can. You just have to organize things. And
I’ve known, at Hewlett-Packard, lots and lots of women who were
managers and had families, and even people who did job-sharing kinds of
things. It’s entirely possible.

**Abbate:**

That reminds me of a question I was going to ask. You’ve obviously
worked with a lot of start-ups. Do you see a lot of women in leadership
positions in start-ups?

**Hawthorn:**

Not usually in the technical side, but occasionally. More often women in
marketing positions, in sales positions; always in personnel positions.
If there’s a Vice President of Human Resources, it almost always is a
woman. And even though those are the non-technical sides, still, it’s a
start-up, and they’re involved in the leadership of the start-up.

On the technical side, I think that women are in start-ups in just the
same proportion that they are in the upper management of any of the
companies. You see just about as many.

**Abbate:**

So it’s not a technical thing so much as a managerial issue?

**Hawthorn:**

Yes; yes. Because as you go up—I don’t know what the numbers are
anymore, but if you take a company like Informix: at the bottom level,
you’re like sixty percent women, and the next level up it becomes fifty,
and then forty, and so on. It’s kind of the glass ceiling kind of stuff.

**Abbate:**

But it seems like if you’re starting your own company, it seems like you
should be able to bypass that, in the sense that if you came up with the
idea and wanted to start the company, then you should be able to do it.

**Hawthorn:**

So, women as the actual founders: that’s been very interesting. There is
this wonderful woman entrepreneur, who was head of marketing at Cisco;
her name is Cate \[Muther\]. She started an incubator for women’s
start-ups.

**Abbate:**

I didn’t know that.

**Hawthorn:**

I went to a meeting of women entrepreneurs or something where she spoke,
and there were all sorts of numbers about how the venture capitalists
don’t like to put money behind women. I don’t know whether it’s that
they don’t like to put money behind women, or if it’s just the usual old
boys’ network. When I am working in a start-up and I’m hiring people, I
do only hire people I know. This is really true. I only want someone to
go to war with me whom I’ve gone to war with before. I will very
reluctantly hire someone I don’t know, and then only based on
recommendations from someone I do know, because every hire that you make
is so precious, and everyone has to pull their own weight. So I’m not a
person who criticizes the old boys’ network. You got a hundred thousand
dollars: are you going to put it behind someone you don’t know, or
someone you do know? If it’s going to be someone you don’t know, that’s
a lot more risky. So it may be that. But for whatever reason,
women-owned companies were having a hard time getting money from the
venture capitalists; so Cate put together this incubator for women-owned
companies.

That was before the recession. I don’t know what’s happened with it
since then. But there were lots of numbers about that. And in fact,
there are a few women-owned companies now that I know about. I know
someone who just went to work for one—Anu Shukla’s company, \[Rubric\].

But CEO’s, Board Members, all of that: it’s still heavily male-oriented.
I was asked to sit in on a board meeting, to advise a board on some
stuff having to do with their product and whether their people were
getting the product out fast enough, and so forth. They were meeting in
this room in this hotel, so I went to the hotel, and I opened up the
door to the room, and it was fifteen men. That’s it\! \[laughs.\] And
me. And I just thought, “I can’t believe this\!” This was a year ago. I
walked in and I thought, “I just can’t believe this\!” I wanted to shut
the door\! \[laughs.\] I said, “Excuse me,” and they were all sitting
there as I opened up the door. No, at the top levels it’s still very
heavily male.

**Abbate:**

Well, that’s a good question, how to get more women. I’ll have to find
some entrepreneurs. I actually found some interesting entrepreneurs from
the early seventies . . .

**Hawthorn:**

Yes?

**Abbate:**

. . . who had started their own software services companies, because
people were still doing custom software then. Women who had specifically
started companies to employ young mothers who wanted to work from home
on programming.

**Hawthorn:**

Oh, yes.

**Abbate:**

But I haven’t found a lot who did more of a technical start-up.

**Hawthorn:**

Cate will know a whole group of women who have done technical stuff.

**Abbate:**

Okay. I’ll check that out. Do you know what that incubator was called?

**Hawthorn:**

The Women’s Technology Cluster.

**Abbate:**

Anyway: Let me thank you so much for talking with me\!

**Hawthorn:**

Well, thank you\! Great\!

Retrieved from
"<http://ethw.org/index.php?title=Oral-History:Paula_Hawthorn&oldid=108338>"

[Categories](/Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* [Profession](/Category:Profession "Category:Profession")
* [Business](/Category:Business "Category:Business")
* [Management](/Category:Management "Category:Management")
* [Communications](/Category:Communications "Category:Communications")
* [Communication
  systems](/Category:Communication_systems "Category:Communication systems")
* [Computing and
  electronics](/Category:Computing_and_electronics "Category:Computing and electronics")
* [Computer
  architecture](/Category:Computer_architecture "Category:Computer architecture")
* [Computer
  classes](/Category:Computer_classes "Category:Computer classes")
* [Computer
  networks](/Category:Computer_networks "Category:Computer networks")
* [Computer
  science](/Category:Computer_science "Category:Computer science")
* [Computing](/Category:Computing "Category:Computing")
* [Data systems](/Category:Data_systems "Category:Data systems")
* [Software & software
  engineering](/Category:Software_%26_software_engineering "Category:Software & software engineering")
* [Engineering
  disciplines](/Category:Engineering_disciplines "Category:Engineering disciplines")
* [Engineering
  education](/Category:Engineering_education "Category:Engineering education")
* [People and
  organizations](/Category:People_and_organizations "Category:People and organizations")
* [Corporations](/Category:Corporations "Category:Corporations")
* [Government](/Category:Government "Category:Government")
* [Non-profit](/Category:Non-profit "Category:Non-profit")
* [Scientists](/Category:Scientists "Category:Scientists")
* [Universities](/Category:Universities "Category:Universities")
* [Engineering
  fundamentals](/Category:Engineering_fundamentals "Category:Engineering fundamentals")
* [Systems engineering and
  theory](/Category:Systems_engineering_and_theory "Category:Systems engineering and theory")

## Contents

* [1 About Paula Hawthorn](#About_Paula_Hawthorn)
* [2 About the Interview](#About_the_Interview)
* [3 Copyright Statement](#Copyright_Statement)
* [4 Interview](#Interview)
  * [4\.1 Background and Education](#Background_and_Education)
  * [4\.2 Starting at Texaco](#Starting_at_Texaco)
  * [4\.3 Computer Courses](#Computer_Courses)
  * [4\.4 Return to School](#Return_to_School)
  * [4\.5 Policies Against Women at
    School](#Policies_Against_Women_at_School)
  * [4\.6 After Graduation](#After_Graduation)
  * [4\.7 Women's Activism at
    Companies](#Women.27s_Activism_at_Companies)
  * [4\.8 Working For Startups](#Working_For_Startups)
  * [4\.9 Management Skills](#Management_Skills)
  * [4\.10 Moving from Company to
    Company](#Moving_from_Company_to_Company)
  * [4\.11 Work With Non-Profits](#Work_With_Non-Profits)
  * [4\.12 Joys of Computing](#Joys_of_Computing)
  * [4\.13 Obstacles to Women in
    Computing](#Obstacles_to_Women_in_Computing)
  * [4\.14 Advice for Women](#Advice_for_Women)

[![Powered by
MediaWiki](/resources/assets/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)](//www.mediawiki.org/)
[![Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki](/extensions/SemanticMediaWiki/includes/../resources/images/smw_button.png)](https://www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 21 November 2014, at 10:43\.

* This page has been accessed 4,264 times.

* [About ETHW](/ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* [Policies and disclaimers](/ETHW:Policies "ETHW:Policies")

