Toggle navigation   

ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki(Main_Page)

* ** Go ****()
  * Browse by Subject(ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * Encyclopedia(Encyclopedia)
  
  * Oral Histories(Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * First Hand Histories(First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * LandmarksMilestones(/Landmarks)
  
  * Archives(Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * Education(ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * Random page(Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * Help(Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * Contact us(Special:Contact)
  
  * 
  * Recent changes(Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * New pages(Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* ** Actions ****()
  * View
    source(index.php?title=Oral-History:Hilary_Kahn&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source e")
  
  * History(index.php?title=Oral-History:Hilary_Kahn&action=history "Past revisions of this page [h]")
  
  * 
  * Oral-History(Oral-History:Hilary_Kahn)
  
  * Discussion(index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Hilary_Kahn&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page [t]")
  
  * 
* ** Tools ****()
  * What links
    here(Special:WhatLinksHere/Oral-History:Hilary_Kahn "A list of all wiki pages that link here j]")
  
  * Related
    changes(Special:RecentChangesLinked/Oral-History:Hilary_Kahn "Recent changes in pages linked from this page k]")
  
  * Special
    pages(Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages q]")
  
  * Printable
    version(index.php?title=Oral-History:Hilary_Kahn&printable=yes "Printable version of this page p]")
  
  * Permanent
    link(index.php?title=Oral-History:Hilary_Kahn&oldid=118934 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * Page
    information(index.php?title=Oral-History:Hilary_Kahn&action=info)
  
  * Browse properties(Special:Browse/Oral-2DHistory:Hilary_Kahn)
* ** Account ****(# "Account")
  * Log
    in(index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3AHilary+Kahn)
  
  * 
  * Request account(Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Hilary Kahn

## About Hilary Kahn

Hilary Kahn was born in South Africa in 1943\. She grew up there and
moved to England in 1960 to begin her university studies. There, she
majored in the classics – Latin and Greek. She received a computing
degree at the University of Newcastle where she learned to work with the
KDF 9 computer and ALGOL. Kahn later worked for Manchester University on
COBOL and computer-aided design and software engineering, which she
continued to do for the rest of her career. Kahn was also involved with
the design of the Manchester MU5 computer
system(The_University_of_Manchester_MU5_Computer_System "The University of Manchester MU5 Computer System").
As an integral part of the Computer Science Department at Manchester
University, Kahn headed several research projects on computer-aided
design and information modeling. Kahn passed away in 2007\.

In this interview, Kahn talks about growing up in South Africa and her
initial interest in subjects other than math and science. She also
describes how she got into computing, her experience with the KDF 9
computer and ALGOL, and her interest in computers. She goes into detail
on her adventures in London, arriving at Manchester University, and the
different computer programs and software she used and mastered. She
explains her work and experience with teaching and lecturing on
computers. Kahn talks at great length about her time at Manchester
University.

## About the Interview

HILARY KAHN: An Interview Conducted by Janet Abbate for the IEEE History
Center, 18 April 2001

Interview \# 605 for the IEEE History Center, The Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
the IEEE History Center Oral History Program, IEEE History Center at
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ
07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include identification of
the specific passages to be quoted, anticipated use of the passages, and
identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Hilary Kahn, an oral history conducted in 2001 by Janet Abbate, IEEE
History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

## Interview

INTERVIEW: Hilary Kahn\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: 18 April 2001\
PLACE: Hilary Kahn's office at Manchester University

### Background and Education

**Abbate:**

It’s April 18th, 2001, and I’m speaking with Hilary Kahn.

So, to begin at the beginning, when were you born? And where?

**Kahn:**

Eleventh of July 1943, Cape Town, South Africa.

**Abbate:**

Did you grow up there?

**Kahn:**

Yes. I left there in 1960\. About at the end of 1960\.

**Abbate:**

Was that to go to school?

**Kahn:**

It was to avoid the politics of South Africa as soon as I could, and my
plan was to come to England and do a degree. Keep talking?

**Abbate:**

Sure\!

**Kahn:**

Well, my plan was—The theory was—I was, I didn’t have what—In England,
at English universities, you require something called A Levels, and I
had South African qualifications, which were not A Levels. But I had a
place at Durham University, to study maths, which was very nice of them.
And I went and took a look at it—and didn’t fancy it at all\! —I thought
it was awful.

**Abbate:**

Durham, or . . .?

**Kahn:**

It was cold and bleak, and I’d come from South Africa, and Durham in
winter is quite challenging. So I decided against mathematics, and I
would go forth and do A Levels, and then try again. So: I wanted to do
my A Levels in one year, not two, which meant I couldn’t do science A
Levels, because I couldn’t get the practical work done for in physics
and chemistry; so I went for—and I didn’t know English history, and I
didn’t want to do English, and I had never learned French; so I did
Latin, Greek, ancient history, and maths.

**Abbate:**

Wow\!

**Kahn:**

And, having done that, I was bit stuck, didn’t know what I was going to
do for a degree; so I switched to Latin and Greek for my degree. So my
qualifications, which I got at London University, were in Latin and
Greek—and not much use to anybody\!

**Abbate:**

Which college did you . . . ?

**Kahn:**

Bedford College, this was, which is now swallowed up into Royal
Holloway. Very nice, right in the middle Regents Park next to the zoo\!

**Abbate:**

How did you choose that?

**Kahn:**

I went ‘round lots of places, because it was an excuse to tour
England—remember, I was relatively new in England. So I went to places
like Exeter—because I wanted to see the cathedral; I didn’t actually
have any plan to go to the university there—and all over the place. I
think I would have chosen—I did want to go to Bristol; but the professor
who was head of Greek there was retiring, and I, for some reason,
believed that I should only go there if he was going to be there to
teach me Greek—\which was\ nonsense—so, then London\! Because that’s
where all foreigners go. Yes. London equals England\!

**Abbate:**

What did your parents do for a living?

**Kahn:**

My father was a cardiologist, and he died when I was little; and my
mother was . . . well qualified—she had an M.A. in Hebrew, I think—but
was a housewife; and I have a sister who’s a librarian. And that’s it
really.

**Abbate:**

How did she support you? Or did she remarry?

**Kahn:**

Oh, she did \support us\; no, she didn’t remarry. We had reconverted
our house in South Africa into a block of flats—apartments—and I guess
that was part of the funding of what kept us going. And when we came to
England—everybody came to England initially; that’s my mother, my
sister, and myself—but they went back, and I chose to stay on. And that
was it, really\!

**Abbate:**

Were you interested in maths as a child?

**Kahn:**

Oh yes\! I liked maths, I liked science, I liked archaeology. I didn’t
like Afrikaans; I hated it\!—and that was a political dislike, not
anything else. Well, it was terrible at literature, as well—absolutely
awful literature\! \laughs.\ In my day, it was the only literature was
westerns, and it was just dreadful, absolutely dreadful\!

**Abbate:**

So, okay. You ended up here with a degree in . . .

**Kahn:**

Latin and Greek.

**Abbate:**

Classics, Latin and Greek.

### Introduction to Computing

**Kahn:**

So, my plan was: At that point I wanted to be an archaeologist—and I
wrote to the British Museum, and I wasn’t asking for a job; I was quite
specifically asking for advice on what further training I should have so
that one day I could have a job. I was very keen on the Greco-Roman
period, and I was a rather pathetic student who signed up for the
Society for the Promotion of Greek Studies and the Society for the
Promotion of Roman Studies, and I went to their learned libraries in the
middle of London on a regular basis, which as an undergraduate was an
eccentric thing to do. Anyway, so I was very keen on that. And they
wrote me a fairly nasty letter saying there was no point in my ever
imagining that I could ever get a job with them, because I was not
British, and it was a civil service job. And that was the end of that.

So, although I hadn’t applied for a job, they also didn’t give me the
sort of advice I thought I was asking for. So I saw a sign up saying,
“Go to Newcastle-upon-Tyne and do computing\!” And I had no idea what
a computer was. With hindsight \I realize\ I had seen tape decks at
3M’s \sp?\ in London—in Whitmore Street? Or Wimpole
Street?—somewhere in that area, where I’d walked past when going to
concerts or something. Down in the basement I’d seen these machines
whirring ‘round. And that was my sole exposure to what a computer was.
So I thought, “Well, I’ll go into this post-grad course in computing for
a year, and if they take me that’s fine. If they don’t . . .” And they
did, and that was fine\!

**Abbate:**

So just, on the spur of the moment?

**Kahn:**

Sort of spur-of-the-moment, yes.

**Abbate:**

Did you have an idea that would be a good way to get a job?

**Kahn:**

No; no, no, no; no, absolutely not. It had nothing to do with careers;
it had to do with that looking quite interesting. I don’t really think I
understood what a career might have been. Never, never seriously thought
about it, other than thinking I’d be an archaeologist—which I’m not\!
\laughs\ Which is a pity\!

**Abbate:**

So, so this is the mid-sixties?

**Kahn:**

Mid-sixties, yes. Right in there. I can never remember when I graduated,
but I can look it up: ‘65 or thereabouts. Or ‘64, whatever. I got older.

So I went and did a year’s course, and they had a bit of a problem with
me, because for a start, everybody else, bar one bloke, were doing a
numerical analysis course, and they wouldn’t let me on that course
because I didn’t have the maths background. They did very kindly get me
on a course, which they eventually concocted a title for, which was
Diploma in Business Processing, or some such rubbish, which had a bloke
on it as well; I don’t remember much about him.

But I didn’t attend lectures on how to program. They gave me an
absolutely excellent little book that had been published by what was
then RSRE, which is Malvern area; and this little booklet told you how
to write programs in ALGOL; I think ALGOL 60\. And it introduced you to
procedures and recursion very early on, so I didn’t know they were a
problem. Everybody else was struggling because they were being taught
the traditional way: that you learn your assignment statement, and you
were to handle your declarations and so on. So I just had this book I
learned from—which was very good\!

**Abbate:**

So that you taught yourself, sort of?

**Kahn:**

Not really, because there were people to ask. It would be unfair to say
I taught myself. I was the only girl on the course; I was the only arts
graduate they’d ever taken; so it was—it was an interesting experience.

The students were used to run the computing service in the evening, and
Day One they said, “This is a computer; these are tape decks; and this
is a printer. This is how you load paper in the printer; and this is how
you change tapes on the tape deck; and that’s a console”—which was a
Flexowriter—and then they said, “Right\! We’re off down the pub\!” And
that was it, more or less\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

So you were operating the computers?

**Kahn:**

Yes\! Absolutely\!

**Abbate:**

For just . . . for yourselves? Or for other people as well?

**Kahn:**

No, no no, for other people: It was running the University’s computing
service, such as it was. They used students out-of-hours.

### Working with the KDF 9 and ALGOL

**Abbate:**

So as soon as you came there, you basically had . . .

**Kahn:**

Got put on with it, yes. And it was great big vacuum tape decks, yes?
You’d hook the bits of tape together, and then they go pfft\!
\laughs.\

**Abbate:**

What sort of a computer was that?

**Kahn:**

KDF 9—which was an English Electric LEO Marconi machine. Very nice
machine architecture, with a stacking architecture designed to be useful
for compiler writing, and quite fun to program by hand. It didn’t go
anywhere, in the long run, but it was a nice machine. I think in general
the first machine you program is the one that you think was a nice
machine\! \laughter.\

**Abbate:**

I think that’s probably true. So you were doing this in ALGOL? Or in
assembler?

**Kahn:**

ALGOL and KDF 9 machine code, yes. The assembler for it was quite a nice
assembler, which gave you a lot of control over the stack; and the games
were to put things into the stack and then, when you wanted them, just
at the right moment they would appear at the top and you could pop them
out\! And that was—that felt very elegant. I’d spend hours doing useless
things like making sure it was more efficient from that point of view.

**Abbate:**

From the memory management point of view?

**Kahn:**

Yes, absolutely\! Which mattered in those days—when machines were not
fast. I don’t remember what the memory capacity was, but it wasn’t
large.

**Abbate:**

What sort of memory would that be?

**Kahn:**

Core store memory, in terms of type of memory; but what it was in terms
of size, I don’t remember now—not large.

**Abbate:**

It’s interesting: Everyone seems to have a memory story, whether it’s
rotating drums or core memory or something else.

**Kahn:**

Well, memory was a real issue\! I mean, if your program didn’t fit or
the data didn’t fit, then you spent a lot of time trying to make sure
that it did fit; it was an important issue for you\! And software did
very little to help you. So, ALGOL 60 was a very nice language to have
learned, but you had to worry about how things were being stored in
order to be appropriately efficient, even in ALGOL 60\. Yes.

**Abbate:**

When do you think that stopped? The overwhelming importance \of
memory\?

**Kahn:**

To some extent it’s never stopped, because people keep complaining they
haven’t got enough memory for X—whatever X is. Certainly the last 20
years, 15, 20 years, it’s ceased to be an issue. When I first came here,
it was . . . We had a very small PDP—16K memory, probably—and trying to
run simulators on that, originally, was quite, quite tough\! Yes. There
wasn’t a lot of room. It was a different sort of machine from the Atlas
machine, which was the first \Manchester computer?\ that I used.

**Abbate:**

When you were at Newcastle, you were taking this course, and it was
called Business Computing?

**Kahn:**

Right. Business . . . Diploma in something-or-other to do with data
processing; which meant that I learned COBOL—which was a great benefit
to me—perhaps—\laughs\ in future life.

**Abbate:**

And this was like a Masters?

**Kahn:**

It was equivalent of a Master’s, but you can’t give—in those days you
can’t give an arts graduate a Master of Science degree—because they
don’t have a Bachelor of Science. \laughs.\ So it was a Diploma.

### Work with Computers

**Kahn:**

University of Newcastle were very nice: they arranged for me to get some
funding from English Electric in Kidsgrove, which is just South of
Manchester, and in return for that funding, I had to work for them for a
year. I actually finished the course, and then I stayed on for three
months over the summer to write data processing software, in machine
code, for some-or-other company—stock control software. Looking at it
now, it’s sort of extraordinary that people did that sort of thing.

And then, I went to English Electric in Kidsgrove for a year, where I
worked on peripheral controller software, and . . . Oh, they set me on a
learn-to-compute course, originally, a whole month or something in
London; which was great fun, because the course work—having paid for me
for a year, you’d have thought that they would realize I didn’t need an
introduction to computing course—but they forced you to take it\! So,
you sat there all day, did your so-called homework on the tube, came
back into the middle of London, and then you were free\! \laughs.\ And
of course, because I’d been at London University, I had friends and so
on in London—so I enjoyed that\! And then I did the year at English
Electric, which I didn’t enjoy at all.

**Abbate:**

Why not?

**Kahn:**

Poor management. Stupid instructions. They kept on having me write
little bits of some piece—I was supposedly maintaining the operating
system. It was on a computer called the System IV, which was based on
the UNIVAC(UNIVAC "UNIVAC") something-or-other and the [IBM
360(IBM_System/360 "IBM System/360"), all have the same architecture.
It’s an RCA machine. It was a ridiculous operating system. It was
undocumented, more or less, and I was supposed to sit there, and should
there be anything wrong with it, I had to fix it. At the time, it didn’t
have a lot of bugs, so I was bored out of my mind. They then gave me
this peripheral controller software to write with some bloke helping me,
but it was not very interesting stuff, and they’d keep changing the
specification of what I was supposed to be doing. I even got told off
once for having done a variant, and told to abandon it and do the next
variant; and then the time we came around to the third or fourth
variant, it was a lot like one of the earlier ones—so I dug out the
earlier one and finished it—and got told off for finishing it. And I was
pretty annoyed, really\! \laughs.\ It seemed pathetic\! I’m sure from
the management point of view it all looked fine, but from where I was,
at the lowest of the low, it was not much of a . . . I didn’t have much
interest.

**Abbate:**

Were there a lot of other women there?

**Kahn:**

No. There certainly were some other women in more senior positions than
I, but those were the days when the Factories Acts said that women
couldn’t work in a factory. It’s a factory environment; they built
machines. So, although we were in a different building, working late at
night was not permitted. I used to do \it\, and then I’d be told off
regularly for working through till midnight or whatever. When there was
stuff to be done, I’m happy to work, and by the Factories Act, you
weren’t supposed to be doing that.

**Abbate:**

Is that just in a factory, or anywhere?

**Kahn:**

I don’t know. I really don’t know what the law was at the time. Yes. But
it was certainly something that I was told off for a number of times.

**Abbate:**

Although we all know in reality that people working on computer problems
are working at night.

**Kahn:**

Absolutely\! Yes. And it was perfectly good; if you wanted access to
machines and things, you worked at night.

Anyway, so that was English Electric. It wasn’t terribly interesting.
And I applied for a job here, as an assistant lecturer. I don’t know
why. I don’t believe I ever had a desire to be an academic; it was just
an alternative.

People had applied on my behalf, and encouraged me to apply, for jobs in
industry in the States. Mostly, I think, because they wanted me—I had
the car, and when we went for interviews in London, I was the person
who’d do the driving to London; and as part of that I needed also to
be part of the application process. I think that’s why everybody filled
in the forms for me\! \laughter.\ Maybe. I don’t remember, because I
really didn’t want to go; it was in New Jersey—and I couldn’t imagine
why I’d want to go to New Jersey.

### Arriving at Manchester University, Working with COBOL

**Abbate:**

Was it at Bell Labs or something?

**Kahn:**

No, no no no no, it was at some oil company or other, wanting lots of
computing done, and it was very well-paid, and sounded absolutely dire\!
So I had no real desire to go there, but I was a good taxi service for
London\! And anyway, I applied for the assistant lecture post here.

**Abbate:**

Here in Manchester.

**Kahn:**

Yes, right.

I cannot, I really cannot say that I had a plan to be an academic. I
just had a plan not to be at English Electric. So in so far as I had a
plan, that’s what it was\! \laughs\

**Abbate:**

To escape.

**Kahn:**

To escape from English Electric, yes\!

**Abbate:**

Just to back up a little: So when you’d gone to Newcastle, did you
immediately say, “Oh, yes, computers are for me,” once you got a chance
to use them?

**Kahn:**

All right\! Yes, I liked them. I like an awful lot of things though, so
. . . \laughter.\ Quite seriously, I think if I’d been plunked in
archaeology, I’d have been just as happy; if I’d been plunked in a lot
of things. So, I was perfectly happy with it; I enjoy computers. I like
problem-solving, and programming is problem-solving. It certainly felt
like it then. Whether it still does, I’m not so sure. These days it’s
web-searching and seeing if you can find somebody else who’s solved the
problem for you\! \laughter.\ So I enjoyed that aspect of it, but
I—with regret, no real plan for a career. Which I feel is bad; I
should have had a plan, you know; I should have followed it through. But
I didn’t.

**Abbate:**

I don’t think many people do.

**Kahn:**

So that’s as far as it went\!

**Abbate:**

So you end up as an assistant lecturer . . .

**Kahn:**

. . . which is the lowest you can be, which is essentially probationary
grade. And it was fundamentally very brave of the department to appoint
me, because why would they appoint a classicist, with one year in
industry, one year post-grad diploma in something?

Part of the reason was, I think, because I said I’d done COBOL. At this
point, we were designing the fifth machine here in Manchester, MU-5, and
that was a machine designed to be good for the support of compilers and
processing; software support. I thought the theory was that I’d work on
operating systems, which I fancied; their theory was that I’d work on
compilers, which I didn’t fancy; and their particular theory was I’d
write a COBOL compiler—which I truly didn’t fancy. \both laugh.\ I
went along with this for a bit, fairly unhappily, but, you know, I was
in no position to argue.

At some point or other they said they needed somebody to help the
engineers. A very basic simulator \for the MU-5\ had been written to
run on Atlas, which was the university’s fourth machine, and it was the
university’s workhorse; and they needed people to just help the
engineers do paper tape punching and generally be a dog’s body and run
the staff. I volunteered, because it seemed better than writing COBOL
compilers. Of course, anything was better than writing COBOL compilers.

**Abbate:**

This was a simulator of the new machine \MU-5\?

**Kahn:**

Yes. And that was really only partially effective. The person who’d
started to develop that, he and I then volunteered to rewrite it. (I’m
not sure it was a volunteer; we’d like to feel it was a volunteer, I’m
sure.) We were told to rewrite it, and Atlas was going to be switched
off at some point, and we’d turn and use a 1905E, which was an ICL
machine, which was being used as a workhorse in the department. So he
and I . . . So at this point I started writing logic simulators, and
about that point nobody said I had to write COBOL compilers anymore,
which was great\! \laughs\ So I ended up becoming a computer-aided
design person—but it’s only because I was avoiding COBOL compilers\!
\laughs\

**Abbate:**

That’s a good enough reason\! \laughs\

**Kahn:**

It’s a good enough reason, absolutely.

I used to lecture on COBOL. It’s the only time in my life I’ve fallen
asleep while giving a lecture\!

### Experience with Lecturing on COBOL

**Abbate:**

No\!

**Kahn:**

Absolutely\! It was . . . Our lecture theaters have a pattern of two
boards that switch on each side, and a single board in the middle; and I
would use the two boards—the middle board and the other two boards—and
then I’d have to go back to the first two. In the days of chalk,
lecturing with blackboard and chalk. And I got to the end of a board,
and I knew it was the end, because I had such a regular pattern of how I
used the boards that when I got to here, then it must be the end. And I
had no idea what I’d been saying—absolutely none whatsoever\! I had to
go to the back of the lecture theater and read it, so I’d know where I
had to start again\! Very embarrassing. \laughter.\ Falling asleep in
COBOL lectures\!

**Abbate:**

So you were teaching the whole time you were doing this?

**Kahn:**

The students I was teaching initially were third-year students, and
they’d been in computing at least as long as I had. It was all quite
embarrassing\! It was very funny actually, because of course my only
training really had been as an arts graduate—an arts undergraduate. And
the professors of Latin would pick up a book of poetry that they were
going to talk to you about—and they were very old books; not old because
they were old and important, they were just old and badly looked after,
so they’d fall to bits—and the professor would pick up a bunch of pages
and he’d walk around, lecturing from these bits of Latin—it was Horace,
I remember in particular—and because he didn’t always pick up a
consistent bunch of pages, you know, he’d turn the page and it wasn’t
even the same poem—but he’d move on to the next poem\! \laughs\. I was
used to this peculiar style of lecturing; and of course when I came to
lecture to science students, they thought you had to write everything on
the board. If it wasn’t on the board, then they didn’t have to write it
down; they had no concept of taking notes and things. After I’d lectured
the first time, maybe for about twenty minutes, one of the students
asked, well, was I ever going to write anything down, so that they’d
know what they had to remember? \laughter.\ Which I thought was sweet.

The first lectures I gave were on sorting techniques. It just happened
to be something that I’d been interested in when I was at Newcastle.
COBOL came later.

**Abbate:**

Were you making up the curriculum as you went along?

**Kahn:**

Oh, yes. It’s very interesting how little guidance there was. There were
no standards for how you should give your talk. What you lectured on
were the things that were—either the expertise you had, or an interest
you happened to have. . . . There was a clear . . . That’s unfair; there
was a very basic curriculum that went through what had to be taught in
the first and second years, and obviously the maths base—because we
inherit perfectly well from the maths experience over centuries—so
there’s a sort of good maths stream. Because our department came from
electrical engineering, not maths, there was also a good basic
electrical engineering stream—so all our students learned about
hardware; all our students learned logic design. There was no business
of “Are you going to be a hardware or a software person?” You just
learned that computer science was a combination. But by the time you
came to the third year—which is still true, now—there was considerably
more freedom in what lectures you could give. And you were able to
lecture on the things that were of interest to you.

And over the . . . The course would have started in, whenever it was,
‘65 or something; so by the time we’d been running for maybe two lots
of graduates graduating, there was a fairly solid central syllabus—and
an absolute understanding that anybody should be in a position to
lecture on any part of the syllabus; it wasn’t a matter of “I only
lecture on my favorite things.” As it is now\! \laughs\

There was a lot more expectation that if somebody needed to give
lectures on a topic, they could do it—and if you had to learn it, then
you learnt it\! So, for years I lectured on—not Gaussian elimination per
se, but basically on methods related to that. And as a
non-mathematician, it was an oddity to ask me to do that operations
research type stuff. But it was quite fun; I didn’t mind.

**Abbate:**

So you must have learned a lot, to be able to teach it . . .

**Kahn:**

Yes. The best thing of being in the department is what you learn while
you’re here. Still true\! Absolutely still true. If you’re not learning,
you shouldn’t be hanging out here, I don’t think.

**Abbate:**

And did you also do the engineering side?

**Kahn:**

Oh, we had a little experiment . . . Well, yes and no. Very little of
the lecturing, but we did decide at one point that all the software
people should do a little bit of hardware design, and all the hardware
people should do some software. This is the staff \I’m talking about\.
So we all had to do labs; we all did the first year lab experiments one
summer, and it was absolutely fantastic\! It was really great fun, and
you could do these bits of design, and then you had to build them on
patch boards. And I had great fun color-coding the wires, so all my
clock signals were a particular color, and a particular data path was
blue, and another data path was green; which of course caused much
amusement among the staff, because it’s not necessary to make it work.
It was just—it was like knitting, really. It was quite fun\!
\laughter.\ Oh yes, really, we all had a go at something like that,
which was fine.

### Computer Software Design and the Department

**Abbate:**

Was there a division of hardware people and software people in the
department?

**Kahn:**

Yes, yes. That division must have started relatively early on. The first
of the software people, way before my time—in fact, he left as I joined
(it wasn’t my fault he left\!)—was Tony Brooker, and he really built up
the software side through the ‘50s, in developing proper manuals and
developing various languages, in particular Atlas Autocode. He really
built the department up so that there were a number people around him
who were software developers. A compiler compiler was one of . . . You
know what that is?

**Abbate:**

I’m sorry?

**Kahn:**

The Compiler Compiler.

**Abbate:**

Like YACC \Yet Another Compiler Compiler\?

**Kahn:**

Yes, but the first one\! \laughs\ And that work was work that he’d
started. So had I done a COBOL compiler, then I would have been using
the original Compiler Compiler, or variants of it, in the processing,
which at that time would have been very unusual.

**Abbate:**

I would think so. Did it have a name other than . . . ?

**Kahn:**

Compiler Compiler\! And then there was another one called the Revised
Compiler Compiler, which was what my husband was—his research was in
that; and I used that language for a long time for simulation, because
it was a good language, its compiler-writing facilities being
essentially just one aspect of it.

**Abbate:**

Once you got into the computer-aided design, you just continued that
ever since?

**Kahn:**

Yes and no. I mean, we did a simulator. The guy who I worked with was
called John May he and I did a simulator, which was very unusual; it
certainly . . . We gave it to ICL—gave it, please note—and it became the
basis of all their simulation systems until very recently. With
hindsight, it’s extraordinary how little we knew of what we were doing
in relation to what was going on elsewhere in the world. At the time we
were doing it, there essentially weren’t logic simulators around, and
the basis of it was unusual. We didn’t actually realize how unusual it
was; we just got on with it, and eventually wrote a summary paper right
at the end, years and years later, but never really got anything out of
it in terms of papers.

We did a lot of work on simulation, and then, because we were teaching
the students, hardware design as well. And they were switching
eventually from— Oh, I did stuff on printed circuit boards, so tracking
software and layout software for printed circuit boards. From the early
‘70s we moved into what is now called the Computer Building, and we
had—before that, and then there as well—a printed circuit board
fabrication facility in the department, which is very odd for computer
science. So I did a lot of the software for that. Then I did software
for— The students started using gate arrays, which were—logic arrays,
they were called, from Ferranti, ULAs \Uncommitted Logic Arrays\—which
only had a very small number of gates on, but it seemed fantastic in
comparison with what we had been doing with black tape and what-have-you
on boards. So I wrote gate array design systems, and all the time there
were all these users; so all the time that I was doing stuff, people
were using it. It’s quite hard work—and less and less obviously
research, as you become more of a dogsbody.

**Abbate:**

I don’t know that expression.

**Kahn:**

I don’t know what the equivalent would be. Basically, you just keep on
doing what you’re told to do; you’re the lowest of the low; you’re a
gopher. A little bit like a gopher, yes? \laughter.\

**Abbate:**

So the design things were always targeted towards some specific need in
the department?

**Kahn:**

In the teaching of the department, or whatever, yes. I never saw it as
a—I never really had an opportunity to see it as a research exercise;
it was much more: people needed something, so I did it. And I had a
small team eventually, and we did it. We needed more tools to do
something? Well, you just work harder and more hours, and then you
produce tools that do something, and then people use them.

I was fortunate in the sense that because I was to some extent
isolated—I didn’t feel isolated, but I was—I learned how to build the
next system based on my previous experience, in an effective manner. In
particular, I learned that if I could put as much of the intelligence of
my system into external files of data, which I then used to configure or
control my fundamental system, then I could switch to new requirements a
lot more flexibly than writing lots more code. So I became interested in
data-driven systems. But it was a self-defense exercise; it was not a
big moral judgment. I’m sure I’ve made no big moral judgments in my
career. I did was what was necessary in order to provide something that,
when they changed what passes for their minds, I could produce some new
tool relatively quickly.

**Abbate:**

When you said you were isolated, do you mean from other people doing
computer-aided design?

**Kahn:**

Well, there weren’t very many in the world anyway doing C.A.D., so it’s
not that; no. I was just—I was the person who did this sort of thing in
the department, and occasionally I had people to help me, and I’d get
students and so on occasionally; but it was not seen as a research
thrust. Because it was just useful stuff that should work—and when they
changed their minds it should work immediately\!

**Abbate:**

“How could it be research if it’s useful?” \laughs\

**Kahn:**

Yes, yes\! Absolutely\!

I tried at some point, in the end successfully, to persuade the
then-head of department . . . that’s not true; I don’t know the dates in
relation to when he took over as head—but I did try very hard to say, as
computer-aided design systems became more common in industry, “Wouldn’t
it be nice if we could buy one?” —so that the students and the staff
could use this other stuff with lovely graphics, and I could maybe get
on with doing something which was a bit more—a little bit more
opportunities for thinking, and what-have-you. We did look at it, but
the person in charge, who was Dai Edwards, just couldn’t get his head
around the idea that these systems cost thousands of pounds. He kept
saying things like, “But a floppy”—we’re talking about these big old
floppies—”a floppy only costs a few pounds,” he’d say. \laughs\ And he
really meant it\! He wasn’t being . . . It’s just— The mindset that
software had value hadn’t arrived; only hardware had value.

**Abbate:**

How much of a software industry was there at this \point\? I’m not
sure what point this is, exactly.

**Kahn:**

We’re in the ‘70s. So there was an adequate software industry. People
were writing operating systems; there was lots of application software
around.

But the culture in this place had been that we wrote our own software,
therefore it was free. And . . . well, that’s the end of it, really,
isn’t it? Whereas with hardware, you knew you had to buy the
wherewithal to make . . . MU-5, for example, was made of huge platters,
and that cost X amount per platter, and they had money for a hundred of
them—and that was it\! So you could put a value on MU-5; it was a
hundred platters. (Of course, that’s nonsense\! It’s value was not
that.) But there was no value in software, because you were going to pay
the people anyway, supposedly; and then they had to do something,
because otherwise they’d be bored. \laughter.\ So we’d write
software\! That was truly how it felt. I’m not complaining about it, you
understand; it seemed perfectly all right to me.

**Abbate:**

I wonder if some of it is . . . It seems like manufacturers had a lot of
software sort of bundled in with the hardware, so that it wasn’t
separately charged. I’m not quite sure how that worked here \in the
United Kingdom\.

**Kahn:**

They did until . . . Well, because . . . It was IBM that actually
switched the mode, in terms of a upwards-compatible series of computers,
thereby giving longevity to whatever it is: you buy one of these
machines and you can live with it for some time. It’s a dead good plan,
you know; you can’t fault the plan. Before that—and to some extent until
people caught on to what IBM were doing—machines and their software were
inextricably bound up together, and you got your machine and it had its
specialist software. And yes, there might be applications over and above
that, but this whole idea of portability, and “CD arrives in the post
and you just load it onto your PC,” just wasn’t there. Everybody didn’t
have the same Windows operating system, et cetera. And there was a lot
of—I think there was a lot of tight interrelationship between the
software and the hardware.

I think the department’s particular attitude—which I’m not complaining
about; it’s just it was interesting—was: Because we’d always developed
our own software, paying for software seemed an extraordinary thing to
do. Why would you?

**Abbate:**

Right.

**Kahn:**

I mean, just: Why would you? \laughter.\ It’s a little bit like
saying, you know, “Why would you go out to a restaurant for a meal if
your wife can cook a meal?” It’s just clearly stupid\! And then you can
stay in and do something, yes?

I genuinely think that was the attitude. I don’t think it was . . . It
would be very, very unfair to say they were being narrow-minded, because
I don’t think they were; it’s just where we’d come from. We’d come from
the environment, “If you want it you write it; if you want it you build
it\!” Because nobody else was likely to have written or built it. So get
on with it\!

Now, that became less and less true, as the industry became so much
broader—so I was very glad in the end when I could get out from under,
and I was no longer the provider of the CAD tools. And I could look at
CAD as an area of research rather than as an area of survival.
\laughter.\

**Abbate:**

When did that happen?

**Kahn:**

In the ‘80s—as late as that. Largely because I didn’t . . .

There’s something else I should explain. The department had
really—throughout its history, its funding for what it was doing was
always \for\ working on a single large research project. And the goals
of what were going on \in that project\ were therefore the
department’s goals. Originally Tom Kilburn’s goals; his 2IC
(second-in-charge) was Dai Edwards, and the two of them, with the other
people who worked with them—Derrick Morris, and so on—they had the goals
of where they were going, and the rest of us fitted in around that.
Particularly if, like me, you were interested in writing stuff that
people use—and I did like that, and I still do. And it was quite a
difference, when you start saying, “Well, what else is going on in the
rest of the world?” if your whole philosophy has been, you know, “We’re
all doing this single project.”

The department eventually got funding from the government for MU-5: the
first time it got, I think, a really huge research grant—a traditional
research grant. And when I came, there was really no feeling—this was
into the ‘60s—really, really no feeling that it was my responsibility as
a lecturer to go out and get my own funding. My responsibility was to
help the corporate goal of building MU-5 and doing the MU-5-related
things. And that’s a very—doesn’t square with what you’d—if you talked
to an academic now, there’s no working point of contact with that sort
of attitude. And it took a long time for that to go away: ten years or
so.

**Abbate:**

And that’s because people were doing separate projects and getting their
own grants?

**Kahn:**

Well, originally they didn’t do separate projects; they just kept all
working to the single goal. And then slowly people came in as the
department grew; and they were not part of “the team” who’d been doing
this exercise, so they would be looking for other funding.

And in the ‘80s—I forget the dates in the ‘80s, but in the ‘80s there
was something called Alvey, which was a deliberate attempt by the U.K.
government—which I guess must have been following an American model—but
anyway, a deliberate attempt by the U.K. government to link industry and
academia. So you had to do projects that had industrial partners; and if
you did that, then they’d give you loads of money.

I actually argued against it, and refused point-blank to play for about
two years before I got summoned into—by then, it must be ‘82 or
something—Dai Edwards’s office and told to shut up and work with what
were then Ferranti. Some part of Ferranti became ICL, but some part of
Ferranti survived. And they basically sat me down with the guys from
Ferranti and said, “They want this work done; you’re the person who can
do it. Get on and you have a research project.” And it was quite a
shock, really, because I didn’t know how to do that sort of thing\!

**Abbate:**

What did you have to do?

**Kahn:**

I had to write a research proposal\! All of my own, right? Which was a
surprise to me\!

**Abbate:**

So you didn’t write it with Ferranti?

**Kahn:**

Oh yes\! Ferranti was equally involved, because it was joint money, as
it were. And that’s how I started doing Alvey-related projects. Then I
started doing lots of Alvey-related projects, when I could see that I
could get funding to do things that were interesting.

**Abbate:**

So the first one . . .

**Kahn:**

It was some time in the ‘80s.

**Abbate:**

Ferranti had something that they wanted to do?

**Kahn:**

They wanted; and they knew we had this piece of expertise. And I’d been
just refusing to play ball, and I can’t really work out why.

**Abbate:**

It was some sort of CAD thing?

**Kahn:**

Yes, oh yes. Yes, yes, yes: To do with their ULAs, or something like
that. It must have been a ULA-related project. I can’t remember now.
“Uncommitted Logic Array”: It’s a form of gate array.

They’d so trained me—not intentionally, but then I’m so brainwashed or
whatever, that I thought my worldly life was to do whatever the
department needed me to do. And this sudden switch to “Well, you’d
better go get some research money, and become an independent human
being”—was fine, but it was a surprise.

**Abbate:**

But once you got used to it, you had more . . .

**Kahn:**

Oh, it was no problem; it was fine.

**Abbate:**

. . . more autonomy?

**Kahn:**

“If that’s the game, then I’ll play the game.” Absolutely\!

**Abbate:**

So it was better, in a sense.

**Kahn:**

Oh yes\! At that point, the department then started buying in the CAD
tools it wanted to use, which was fantastic, because I really didn’t
want to do that. One person, maybe with one research associate or maybe
with one student, cannot write sophisticated CAD software; you just
can’t. Just as one department now cannot build a computer system—MU-5
was the last machine, not because there were no ideas, but because it
just ceased to be possible for a university department to compete, in
time-scales or anything else. Yes\! The money requirements are just too
great.

So it was great\! And so I switched mode in the ‘80s. I can’t remember
when the first independent grant was; it would have been ‘83 or
something, I suppose—I don’t remember.

**Abbate:**

Were you able to come up with a project you wanted to do and then
persuade some industrial partner . . . ?

**Kahn:**

Oh, eventually. Eventually, yes, absolutely. But not initially.
Initially it was: Ferranti had this problem; how about?

I became interested in something EDIF, which was Electronic Design
Interchange Format. I did a lot of work with research students on
database work—my interest was databases to support computer-aided design
of electronic systems, and other things like that—and I met this thing
called EDIF, which was being proposed as a standard.

But you know, again, because of my lack of plan in life, I started
looking at it because I just wanted to make sure that the capability of
this proposed standard was a subset of the capability of the system that
I was designing—that’s my only interest. I had no particular concern
about moving designs from A to B. So I started asking these EDIF people
questions, and they started . . . Initially they didn’t reply, and then
some time in the mid-’80s they said, “If you’re asking all these
questions, you’d better come and talk to us. How about you come and meet
with us, and we’ll give—we’ll all give a tutorial.” Because by this time
we’d written some software for processing it, mainly because if you want
to understand something—you can turn the pages until you’re blue in the
face, \but\ if you write some software that interprets it, you have to
really understand it. So it was a way of concentrating the mind. And so
I became involved with EDIF—again completely by mistake, as always.

And I still in theory chair the EDIF stuff now, but I can’t be
bothered\! \laughs\ I don’t do too much of it now. But it certainly
was a—it meant that I had a lot of work thereafter with the States and
Japan.

**Abbate:**

Whose standard was it?

**Kahn:**

The Electronic Industries Association, now known as the Electronic
Industries Alliance: EIA—people who make RS-232 lines and things, and
they’d never made a software-related standard before. So, there was a
whole path of my life which then went along with EDIF.

Among the other things I’ve become interested in is: How can I formally
specify the sorts of . . . I said I was interested in data-driven stuff,
and that’s remained. How can I formally specify the data-driven stuff so
that I can generate the software, rather than have people write the
software? In looking at specifications and things, we started using a
particular modeling language called EXPRESS. And when they were doing a
. . . EDIF was being enhanced into the ‘80s, early ‘90s, and I proposed
to the EIA that they should do a formal specification before they did an
implementation in terms of a standard. And, largely due to the fact that
they had no idea what I was talking about, they said yes\! \laughter.\
So it became the first of the electronic standards to have a proper
specification behind it.

**Abbate:**

This was the mid-’80s?

**Kahn:**

Late ‘80s. By then that’s the late ‘80s, early ‘90s.

So I’ve worked with EDIF from the mid-’80s through till more or less
now, on and off. In theory, I have the title “Director of the EDIF
Technical Center”: Ooo, such an important title\! \laughs\

**Abbate:**

Which is here?

**Kahn:**

Yes, yes, yes, yes yes. And I run the EDIF web sites and things. But
that’s as may be. The main reason for mentioning it is more to do with
the fact that you asked, how did I establish things that I became
interested in? Through that route \EDIF\ I did a lot of work with
Japan and the States. So I’ve had quite a bit of DARPA funding, which is
eccentric of me and regarded as very odd in the U.K. And not given much
credence, either\! \laughter.\ Well, it’s just because it’s not the
norm, so you can’t be measured by things that are not the norm. But it
has been an interesting experience.

### Professional Organizations and Teaching

**Abbate:**

Have you been very active in professional associations? Standards
bodies, things like that?

**Kahn:**

Standards bodies, yes. \Mainly IEC.\\[This last bit got cut off; I
took a guess from context.\

\TAPE 1, SIDE 2\

**Abbate:**

You didn’t have to deal with the ISO?

**Kahn:**

Less ISO and more IEC, because IEC is the ISO equivalent for the
electronics domain. My dealings with ISO have been because of the
modeling language that we use, EXPRESS, which is really ISO 10303, part
11\. Yes, I have had dealings with them, and yes, I have been turfed out
of meetings for not being sufficiently well-behaved—thinking that things
are really not good and saying so\! But that’s too bad. I was right,
though\! \laughter.\ So that’s okay.

**Abbate:**

How has the teaching program developed here?

**Kahn:**

Well, of course it’s become considerably more formal. And now it’s
dreadfully formalized in what we must and mustn’t do. We have something
called the Quality Assurance something-or-other—QAA is whatever it
stands for—teaching quality assurance and all that stuff; which means
that, as with any . . . Understanding your process is important—and
becomes more important than whether the process is good, bad, or
indifferent. There’s always a problem; it’s a little bit like ISO 9000\.
There is real value—and there is genuine value—in understanding your
processes; \but\ there’s even more value in making sure that the
process you understand is a good one.

We have a lot of—you’ll hear this from any academic now—we have an awful
lot of requirements in what we have to do in documentation:
justification of things we do; explanations of things we do; feedback to
the students on things we do—which old people like me are not entirely
convinced are to the benefit of the students\! There was a time—until
the age of consent, I think, dropped from 21 to 18—that we were in
effect in loco parentis when the students came here, and it was
genuinely possible to be more helpful to them than one can these days.

But the teaching curriculum, a lot of it, is set by standards bodies. In
our case, the BCS—British Computer Society—and the IEEE both have
proposals for what a computing curriculum should be.

**Abbate:**

Really\!

**Kahn:**

Oh yes\! Big, fat documents. And then, if you don’t follow those in some
appropriate way, then you don’t get accredited by the appropriate
societies. So if you want Chartered Engineer status for your graduates,
then you have to do certain things. The world has changed from the sorts
of stuff that . . . . Much less mathematics. Our students—our particular
students—are still required to have maths A-level as their basis, but we
\computer scientists\, generally speaking, teach considerably less
based on the mathematics, and your average student can avoid an awful
lot of it. And it’s difficult to know whether that’s good, bad, or
indifferent: it’s changed. It can’t be all bad, and it for sure ain’t
all good. \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Do they still do the electrical engineering side?

**Kahn:**

Much less, but we have a computer engineering course. And we just,
because . . . After this department came out of electrical
engineering—and it has, about a year ago, it’s reabsorbed the
light-current electrical engineering, and microelectronics has come back
in; so we now . . . There is no separate electrical engineering in this
university; it’s within this department that’s to do with light current.
So we have two or three new professors who’ve come in.

We’ve always kept the stream of computer design, and that’s very
important. It gives our particular courses a balance, as it were, which
is different from other people. Whether students want that balance is
another issue. The jobs are not in designing chips. The jobs are going
down in . . . At least ten years, five years ago, the jobs were in
accounting. Now they’re only going and working for the big banks in the
City of London, or being a consultant—it doesn’t matter what you’re a
consultant at, but being a consultant gets well paid. But I think we are
right to maintain our balance, because it is a unique arrangement.

Now I do less and less CAD stuff, and more and more—I’m interested in
using the data-driven approach for wider issues than this modeling
approach that we’ve been developing over the years. So I’ve been doing
very little on CAD now, and more on integration of systems, and I’ve
worked with different sorts of companies—construction industry, projects
recently with the construction industry. I’m always serving electronics
manufacture, that’s true, but I’m more interested in the manufacturing
process than I am in tools to doing any design.

I don’t really have a proper purpose in life, do I? \laughs\

**Abbate:**

So it’s very applied research, still.

**Kahn:**

It’s applied, yes; oh yes. I enjoy very much if people are using what we
do. That gives . . . And the people who work with me enjoy it as well. I
guess that’s self-selecting, isn’t it? We don’t like—we’re not
theoreticians—I’m not objecting to theory, but I’d just rather apply it.
So we will use some of the more formal techniques and then apply them,
rather than just research into the formal techniques themselves. Just
how we are\! \laughter.\

### Women in the Academy

**Abbate:**

Have you noticed that female students end up in certain areas more than
others, at least at the graduate level?

**Kahn:**

We have so few female students, we had so few female staff members,
\that\ it’s difficult to judge. There are a small number of women who
are interested in the engineering side, and there always have been and
always will be. But there’s a small number of men who are interested in
the engineering side, yes? The majority of where people end up is on the
software side. And I don’t think I see much of a difference in—hearing
what the students are going to do with their careers, I don’t really see
a huge difference in where they’re setting off to.

There may be selection at the—I don’t know how many women get into the
big banks, for example. I think if they’re good enough, they will.

**Abbate:**

So \selection might occur\ after they graduate . . .

**Kahn:**

In terms of what courses they do: not really. I haven’t noticed—but I’m
perhaps a bit insensitive to it.

I have a problem in the fact that I tend not to worry if I’m the only
woman at the meeting, or . . . I was brief—I was for a period the only
woman professor in the science faculty, which is. . .

**Abbate:**

Of the whole university?

**Kahn:**

Of the whole university.

**Abbate:**

When was that?

**Kahn:**

Oh, until last year\! For a period of— There was maths professor, and
she retired, so— I don’t know, maybe it was a couple years \that\
there was just one of me. Before that, there were just two of us. And
that’s horrific\! That’s wrong.

**Abbate:**

When did you become a professor?

**Kahn:**

Early ‘90s? I can’t remember. I’m not very good at these things, am I?
\laughs\. It didn’t make a lot of difference.

**Abbate:**

So it didn’t really make . . .

**Kahn:**

Not from my point of view. I’ve been very independent. Since I
discovered that I had to go forth and find money for my research and
things, I’ve operated essentially very independently, so I haven’t
belonged to anybody particular. I haven’t . . . In the tree, in the
hierarchy of the—they’ve randomly appointed me—before I was a
professor—randomly appointed people who logically I should report to,
but there’s nobody \who\ ever bothered to ever ask me what I was
doing\! It didn’t really matter\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

It hasn’t mattered too much . . .

**Kahn:**

It hasn’t mattered too much. And I think, I reckon, if you do what
you’re supposed to be doing, and you do it okay, people should leave
you to it, basically. As long as you’re not, you know, messing up the
system, undermining the system or whatever.

So I’ve tended to be—incorrectly, I’m prepared to believe, but
nevertheless, I’ve tended to be insensitive to the gender imbalance in
the department. My husband and I argue quite a bit, or used to argue
quite a bit about that: he’s certainly more of a feminist than I am, and
he would go for positive discrimination, and it annoys the hell out of
me, basically\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Is he in this department?

**Kahn:**

He was, yes, he retired recently. He was the Revised Compiler Compiler
man, as opposed the Compiler Compiler man. \laughter.\

But I certainly am not—I’ve done my stint in chairing committees in the
university, or chairing committees in the Science Research Council—the
equivalent of the National Science Foundation, right?—and I’d rather
hope that the reason I was chairing the committees was not because they
wanted to get the quota of women up. Because I’m not that soft a touch,
so they shouldn’t do that if they were just trying to get women\!
\laughing\ They will send me in occasionally as the hatchet man, when
there are difficult projects for review and so on; because I have a
reputation that I will be a hatchet person. In fact, I do it very
rarely; but I do tend, if you follow me, to say what I think. I’m not
very good at the politics\!

**Abbate:**

Well, is that a disadvantage?

**Kahn:**

Oh, I should think so, absolutely\! Yes\! Oh yes, if I’d wanted to
progress up—which I don’t—but if I’d wanted to progress up the
university hierarchy, then you had certainly better behave a lot better
than I did. And I’m quite happy to say something (forgive me) is
bullshit if it’s bullshit. And I’m not at all happy to just let it go.
And that’s . . .

**Abbate:**

That’s worked for you\!

**Kahn:**

I put it down to being South African. I put it down to being South
African. \laughs.\ It’s very un-British; it’s very un-British.

**Abbate:**

Ah, that could be.

**Kahn:**

Oh yes\! It’s very un-British. So, I certainly have a reputation—people
assume that I eat students alive, or something\! \laughs.\ Which is
completely untrue\!

### Reflection on Women in Computing

**Abbate:**

So you don’t feel that being a woman has been an obstacle to you in
terms of advancement?

**Kahn:**

I really, really, really don’t believe so in my case, and I— You can put
it down to my being tough or something; I don’t know what you put it
down to; maybe you just put it down to the fact that I don’t perceive it
as a problem. So maybe it has, and I haven’t noticed because I’ve chosen
not to perceive it as a problem.

I think that you should be judged on what you do and what you’re able to
contribute. Given that’s what I genuinely believe—and I really believe
it; I don’t \just\ say it, I really believe it—it has really not been
an issue; and I ought to worry, but I don’t. I certainly would be quite
happy in every environment, and I don’t mind if it’s all women or men or
whatever. If I want to say something, I will say it.

**Abbate:**

But the department’s been a good . . .

**Kahn:**

Oh, maybe they’re scared of me; I don’t know\! \laughs.\ I don’t
know\! I think in general people have let me get on. As long as I don’t
make a pig’s ear of things, that’s okay\! You know the phrase “pig’s
ear?” Mess\!

**Abbate:**

Have you had any difficulty balancing your career and family
responsibilities?

**Kahn:**

I’ve been very, very, very fortunate. We have one daughter. And the . .
. When we decided that we would have a child, we actually asked the
university—asked the head of department—if we could both go two-thirds
time. This was my husband’s idea—and a very good idea, as the theory
being that we would share the looking-after of the child and not demand
full pay from the department. And the then-head of department, Tom
Kilburn, said, “Well, are you going to be doing two-thirds of a job?”
And we said, “No, no, no, we just realized that because of peculiar
time-keeping, we could inconvenience people.” And he said, “No, if
you’re actually going to do a full job, then you should be paid a full
salary. If it turns out you can’t do that, then we’ll reconsider it.” So
they allowed us to work flexi-hours, long before flexi-hours were
invented.

**Abbate:**

When was this?

**Kahn:**

My daughter was born in 1977\.

So we worked flexi-hours—half of each day each, every night and every
weekend—and that way we kept the jobs going. I have a huge admin load
and always have had; that was fine. And I was at work the day my
daughter was born, so that didn’t inconvenience anybody too much\!
\laughs\

**Abbate:**

Wow\!

**Kahn:**

Well, it’s not far to the hospital from here\! \laughs.\ I only
survived until about twelve o’clock or twelve-thirty, then I had to go
off to the hospital.

So, it was nice writing in and asking for my maternity leave to start
the day after my daughter was born. And the department was very, very
good about it. We actually kept a playpen in the photocopying room in
there, and when we had to both be at a meeting, my daughter got dumped
in there\! \laughs\ —with the nice ladies who ran the print room.
\laughs.\ And the department was excellent about it, absolutely
excellent\! I have no complaints whatsoever. And I think they would
argue that they got benefit as well, because we didn’t—we still computed
all—I still gave all my lectures. I was marking exams the week after she
was born. I was sitting at four o’clock in the morning and feeding a
baby and marking exams, and it’s just one of those things you do if you
have to.

**Abbate:**

What does your daughter do?

**Kahn:**

She’s a biologist. She’s doing a Ph.D. at the moment. And one hundred
percent doesn’t want to have anything to do with computers\! \laughs\

**Abbate:**

When both her parents . . . \laughing\

**Kahn:**

You can’t blame her at all\! But she uses computers, so that’s all
right.

### More on the Department at Manchester

**Abbate:**

Did you have any role models or mentors who encouraged you?

**Kahn:**

No. I mean, I wouldn’t have known what to do with one, I don’t think\!
\laughter.\

The department was, from my point of view, an absolutely excellent place
to be, because I didn’t feel pressurized by things. I really didn’t.
Now, maybe that’s purely because I wasn’t looking for it. I don’t
understand why I don’t have any of the same hang-ups that other people
seem, or problems that other people seem to have had. So either the
department was really very good to me, or I didn’t observe people being
horrible, so it didn’t really make much difference.

**Abbate:**

But in terms of—if you needed assistance, you could find it?

**Kahn:**

Yes\! But I would go to whoever. I certainly was not—it was not gender
related. If I wanted . . .

**Abbate:**

I didn’t mean necessarily \gender-related mentoring\.

**Kahn:**

But if I wanted . . . I mean the . . . I got on . . . Tom Kilburn’s
second-in-charge, as I say, was Dai Edwards; and Dai Edwards then took
over when Tom retired in ‘81\. And although Dai Edwards is a very fiery
Welshman, and he does lose his temper like that \snaps fingers\, I got
on with him really really well, mostly because when he didn’t say
anything sensible, I was quite happy to tell him it wasn’t sensible. I
don’t think I—I really didn’t do it because I wanted to establish a
point; it was part of the same thing, that if it isn’t sensible, then
you should say so. And I was rather pleased that when he retired, he
actually thanked me for the honesty with which I had talked with him
over the years\! \laughter.\

From my point of view, he was probably the—he was a very strong person,
and he was probably the person . . . I got told off once by somebody in
the university—saying, “Oh my god, you were trained by Dai Edwards,
weren’t you?”—for arguing about something in the same way that he would
have done. And I’m happy with that\! If you have an opinion you should .
. . You shouldn’t hurt people, but you should certainly state what you
think.

So he was probably I think the closest. And also I’ve been very
fortunate—again, this will sound sloppy—but my husband and I are
both—are friends, and he’s been an enormous help to me. Particularly,
I was organizing the celebrations for the fiftieth anniversary, and that
was very very hard work in ‘98; for a year essentially I did almost
nothing else but work twenty-four hour, twenty hours a day, planning all
these huge celebrations we had. And it was very helpful having somebody
around who A) understood what I was doing, but B) could give a technical
opinion; and I still rely heavily on the technical opinion of “Well, you
know, it won’t come across very well if you do it that way”; or “No, you
can’t say that”; “The wording of that needs to be changed or something,
because it isn’t quite right.” That helps; that helps enormously.

**Abbate:**

Did you meet him here?

**Kahn:**

Yes, yes. Boring, huh? \laughs\ “Boring\!” \[laughs\] We both like
cricket. \laughs\

**Abbate:**

What’s your husband’s name?

**Kahn:**

Brian Napper.

**Abbate:**

Brian Napper.

**Kahn:**

Right. So half the time I have to remember that I’m Mrs. Napper.

**Abbate:**

Are you?

**Kahn:**

Oh yes\! When I go home I’m Mrs. Napper; when I’m at work I’m Kahn. It
was his idea, not mine, because he thought it would confuse the students
to have two people called Napper. Instead it didn’t confuse the
students; it horrified the students that Miss Kahn was pregnant\! It was
so funny\! They were really, really embarrassed. \laughs.\ In the
‘70s, yes? Really funny\! They’d look anywhere, like this\! \mimics
student avoiding looking at pregnant professor.\ Ah, times have
changed\!

**Abbate:**

Well, it was a probably a good lesson for them.

**Kahn:**

It was interesting\! Because most of them didn’t know that we were
married; why would they? We didn’t have the same name. \laughs.\ That
was the theory, anyway: not to confuse the students.

**Abbate:**

To keep them guessing\!

**Kahn:**

We just didn’t think they were bright enough to cope with two people
with the same surname, they wouldn’t get the—they wouldn’t hand in their
work to the right one.

**Abbate:**

Well, if you were both Dr. Napper . . .

**Kahn:**

No, I don’t have a Ph.D.\! I cheated; I didn’t get a Ph.D.. Which was,
again, an argument I had with the university. In order to get a Ph.D. I
would have needed to start . . . I was . . . By the time . . . I
basically was supervising a lot of students, including Ph.D. students;
but if you supervise Ph.D. students, you cannot also be a candidate for
the degree. And when they said to me, “You really, really, really must
get a Ph.D.; otherwise you’ll never get promotion; it’ll be the end of
the world, blah, blah, blah”—they then said “You have to get rid of all
the Ph.D. students until you’ve got your Ph.D.” And I said I didn’t want
to do that, because we were doing this interesting work, et cetera et
cetera. So—I don’t have a Ph.D. But I have supervised lots and lots of
Ph.D. students. Successfully\!

**Abbate:**

Well, it doesn’t sound like that was a disadvantage to you.

**Kahn:**

I don’t think so. It was, but . . . I’m sure it will have delayed
something or other, but I can’t say that I’m too bothered. I enjoy very
much working with the good students, and I would have hated to have
parted with them for a period of two or three years while I dutifully
wrote up a Ph.D.—to what end? \pause.\ Don’t tell my daughter\!
\laughs.\

**Abbate:**

Is she getting one now?

**Kahn:**

She’s studying for her Ph.D. at the moment, yes.

### On Chartered Engineers

**Abbate:**

\Remembering something from earlier in the conversation.\ What was I
going to ask you? Oh, the “Chartered Engineer”: I don’t really
understand . . . As far as computer science is concerned, what is the
significance of being a Chartered Engineer?

**Kahn:**

It’s more to do with legal protection, I think, than actual genuine
qualification. If you’re a Chartered Engineer—there are certain jobs,
particularly in the European context, that you need to be a Chartered
Engineer in order to get those jobs. So it is a measure of a certain
degree of qualification. And it matters for some of our students; it
ought to matter, if they want to move around in Europe.

**Abbate:**

So even on the software side?

**Kahn:**

Yes, yes, yes. And it’s to do with understanding. It’s to do with
understanding legal responsibilities as well as good practice and so on.

It’s one of the reasons—it’s not the only reason, but one of the reasons
that we do have a—we are obliged to put into our undergraduate courses
and our taught Master’s courses stuff on legal issues, on company
issues, on accounting issues, so that they get a better—a less
“techie”—view of what it is to be a computer scientist.

**Abbate:**

That’s not bad.

**Kahn:**

It isn’t bad. It just doesn’t come naturally to an awful lot of us. The
majority of the people here are here because they are really techie
computer scientists, to be honest\! \laughs.\ Right?

**Abbate:**

I think that’s true most places.

**Kahn:**

It is. Yes it is. Okay. So we find these quite difficult to go along
with, but it’s—from the bigger perspective, I think it’s the correct
thing.

**Abbate:**

So is every student who graduates also automatically \a Chartered
Engineer\?

**Kahn:**

No, I don’t think so. They certainly take a course that is accredited by
the BCS. I think they may have to apply for the Chartered Engineer
status. Very few of the staff members have —which we should.

**Abbate:**

I didn’t realize it was that common, in computer science.

**Kahn:**

There’s no reason why the staff members shouldn’t apply; it’s just that,
why would they bother? Because, as I said, the main reason for wanting
it is to work in Europe.

**Abbate:**

So if they want to work in the U.K., they don’t need that?

**Kahn:**

Not really.

**Abbate:**

Ah, okay.

**Kahn:**

Maybe some companies require it. But I think the Germans are much
stronger on it, and possibly the French as well. I can’t imagine the
Italians care for it; I don’t know.

**Abbate:**

All right. That makes more sense . . .

**Kahn:**

Have other people mentioned it to you?

**Abbate:**

A few people had mentioned it, but I didn’t—I hadn’t gotten the
impression that it was that much of a necessity to have . . .

**Kahn:**

It’s not.

**Abbate:**

. . . and I wasn’t sure why one would have it; but I guess it’s the
European context.

**Kahn:**

In the European context it’s useful, and I think it also helps the
students from abroad in general, because it’s another thing you can say:
“Chartered Engineer”—sounds a lot better than, “I don’t know what I’m
doing, but I’ve got a degree,” you know\! \laughs.\

**Abbate:**

To have those initials after your name.

**Kahn:**

So that must help in some context.

### Reflection on Working with Computers

**Abbate:**

What have you found to be the most satisfying aspects of working with
computers?

**Kahn:**

Wow\! \pauses\

Doing things that people use. In the end, that’s what I like doing:
doing good things that people use, not garbage that people use. And that
remains the most interesting thing—persuading people that they shouldn’t
be doing things the cheap and nasty way, they should try and do it
properly; and proving to them that in the long run, it’s more effective.
You know, I like the practical nature of it. But I’m not a techie
anymore. I’m not allowed; I haven’t written a program in years. It’s so
sad\! \laughs.\ I’m just a manager.

**Abbate:**

Are there programs—the stuff you did when you were working with
industry: Are there things that became commercial products that you
worked on?

**Kahn:**

It’s less like that, because it’s mostly infrastructure, rather than
things that they can sell on themselves. We ourselves do supply software
to the industry, for not much money, which they incorporate in
tools—I’ve done a bit of that. But it’s more to do with
infrastructure.

Having said that: We’ve currently got a project that’s about to start,
which has supposedly got a wonderfully clear route to exploitation, with
a venture capitalist involved and things—and I’m really not sure I’m
that confident\! \laughter.\ Because while I’m very happy that the
people should use it, there’s an awful lot that comes with the need to
talk to venture capitalists that—things which I’m not sure is my scene.
However, it’s all about learning, yes?

**Abbate:**

How do you think the field of computing has changed since you started?

**Kahn:**

Out of all recognition\! \laughs\

It’s the endemic nature of computers \that\ is just amazing. It used
to amuse me that Tom Kilburn would say he didn’t have a computer—which
he didn’t; he was given one, but he must have given it to his son. But
of course the video player has a computer in it; everything has a
computer in it.

The nicest thing, I think—the most entertaining and the most beneficial,
from my point of view, thing that’s happened is the Web. I think it’s .
. . Five years ago I really wasn’t that interested, because there wasn’t
that much to find; but it’s so huge now, it’s just like having . . . I
love encyclopedias and books, and it’s like having this spread before
you, and you can look for almost anything, and do almost anything—and
then of course try to exercise judgment on what you’ve been given back,
to see if you can tell the good from the bad. Just like encyclopedias,
and reading, and things. The endemic, the completely endemic nature of
computing is amazing. It’s very difficult to see—if one could ever step
back now . . .

But I don’t do anything exciting with computers myself, other than to
look on the Web for the things I want, and write lots of documents,
because I’m a manager really. So that’s it.

### Advice for Other Women in Computing

**Abbate:**

Do you have any advice for young women starting out in computing, or
thinking of going into it?

**Kahn:**

Same advice I’d give to anybody: Do what you want to do\! Not what
anybody else tells you is good for a job or anything else. Just do what
you want to do\!

**Abbate:**

Do you think that’s a problem with students today, that they’re \too
career-oriented\?

**Kahn:**

Oh yes\! I don’t think it’s particularly true of women, but it certainly
is true of students. It’s perceived as a route to a good job, and we
have too many students who are not natural computer scientists or
computer people, who are really not happy with the subject. I’m not sure
what they would be happy with, because I’m not competent to judge, but I
think they are doing it because it’s seen as a good job prospect.

**Abbate:**

So you’d rather they do it because they . . .

**Kahn:**

. . . enjoy it\!

**Abbate:**

. . . enjoy it.

**Kahn:**

Yes. Enjoy it. More than games. That’s fun as well, I’m sure, but it . .
.You should do things because you enjoy them and you think you’re going
to continue enjoying them, so you don’t mind getting up in the morning
and going to work. I bet that’s true for you\! \laughs.\ I think it
just should be what people do\! And maybe I’m very fortunate; maybe
everybody can’t fall into that category. Maybe you have to do jobs you
don’t want to do. But if you have the opportunity, then do what you will
enjoy doing—whatever it is.

\End of interview\

Retrieved from
"<http:/ethw.org/index.php?title=Oral-History:Hilary_Kahn&oldid=118934>"

Categories(Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* Universities(Category:Universities "Category:Universities")
* Engineering
  education(Category:Engineering_education "Category:Engineering education")
* Computer science
  education(Category:Computer_science_education "Category:Computer science education")
* Computer
  engineering(Category:Computer_engineering "Category:Computer engineering")
* Software
  architecture(Category:Software_architecture "Category:Software architecture")
* Software
  performance(Category:Software_performance "Category:Software performance")
* Software
  quality(Category:Software_quality "Category:Software quality")
* Computing and
  electronics(Category:Computing_and_electronics "Category:Computing and electronics")
* Profession(Category:Profession "Category:Profession")
* People and
  organizations(Category:People_and_organizations "Category:People and organizations")

## Contents

* 1 About Hilary Kahn(#About_Hilary_Kahn)
* 2 About the Interview(#About_the_Interview)
* 3 Copyright Statement(#Copyright_Statement)
* 4 Interview(#Interview)
  * 4\.1 Background and Education(#Background_and_Education)
  * 4\.2 Introduction to Computing(#Introduction_to_Computing)
  * 4\.3 Working with the KDF 9 and
    ALGOL(#Working_with_the_KDF_9_and_ALGOL)
  * 4\.4 Work with Computers(#Work_with_Computers)
  * 4\.5 Arriving at Manchester University, Working with
    COBOL(#Arriving_at_Manchester_University.2C_Working_with_COBOL)
  * 4\.6 Experience with Lecturing on
    COBOL(#Experience_with_Lecturing_on_COBOL)
  * 4\.7 Computer Software Design and the
    Department(#Computer_Software_Design_and_the_Department)
  * 4\.8 Professional Organizations and
    Teaching(#Professional_Organizations_and_Teaching)
  * 4\.9 Women in the Academy(#Women_in_the_Academy)
  * 4\.10 Reflection on Women in
    Computing(#Reflection_on_Women_in_Computing)
  * 4\.11 More on the Department at
    Manchester(#More_on_the_Department_at_Manchester)
  * 4\.12 On Chartered Engineers(#On_Chartered_Engineers)
  * 4\.13 Reflection on Working with
    Computers(#Reflection_on_Working_with_Computers)
  * 4\.14 Advice for Other Women in
    Computing(#Advice_for_Other_Women_in_Computing)

![Powered by
MediaWiki(resources/assets/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)](//www.mediawiki.org/)
![Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki(extensions/SemanticMediaWiki/includes/../resources/images/smw_button.png)](https://www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 2 July 2015, at 09:52\.

* This page has been accessed 3,326 times.

* About ETHW(ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* Policies and disclaimers(ETHW:Policies "ETHW:Policies")

