Toggle navigation   

[ETHW Engineering and Technology History Wiki](/Main_Page)

* [** Go ****]()
  * [Browse by Subject](/ETHW:Subject_browse)
  
  * 
  * [Encyclopedia](/Encyclopedia)
  
  * [Oral Histories](/Oral-History:List_of_all_Oral_Histories)
  
  * [First Hand Histories](/First-Hand:List_of_First_Hand_Histories)
  
  * [Landmarks/Milestones](/Landmarks)
  
  * [Archives](/Archives:Archival_Collections)
  
  * [Education](/ETHW:About-Education)
  
  * 
  * [Random page](/Special:Random)
  
  * 
  * [Help](/Help:Contents "The place to find out")
  
  * [Contact us](/Special:[Contact)
  
  * 
  * [Recent changes](/Special:RecentChanges)
  
  * [New pages](/Special:NewPages)
  
  * 
* [** Actions ****]()
  * [View
    source](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Anita_Borg&action=edit "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]")
  
  * [History](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Anita_Borg&action=history "Past revisions of this page [h]")
  
  * 
  * [Oral-History](/Oral-History:Anita_Borg)
  
  * [Discussion](/index.php?title=Oral-History_talk:Anita_Borg&action=edit&redlink=1 "Discussion about the content page [t]")
  
  * 
* [** Tools ****]()
  * [What links
    here](/Special:WhatLinksHere/Oral-History:Anita_Borg "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]")
  
  * [Related
    changes](/Special:RecentChangesLinked/Oral-History:Anita_Borg "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]")
  
  * [Special
    pages](/Special:SpecialPages "A list of all special pages [q]")
  
  * [Printable
    version](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Anita_Borg&printable=yes "Printable version of this page [p]")
  
  * [Permanent
    link](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Anita_Borg&oldid=108225 "Permanent link to this revision of the page")
  
  * [Page
    information](/index.php?title=Oral-History:Anita_Borg&action=info)
  
  * [Browse properties](/Special:Browse/Oral-2DHistory:Anita_Borg)
* [** Account ****](# "Account")
  * [Log
    in](/index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Oral-History%3AAnita+Borg)
  
  * 
  * [Request account](/Special:RequestAccount)


# Oral-History:Anita Borg

## About Anita Borg

Anita Borg Naffz was born on January 17, 1949 in Chicago, Illinois. As a
child, she grew up and traveled with her family all over the US. She
received her Ph.D. in computer science from New York University and
embarked on a trailblazing research career in computing and technology.
Anita Borg became a pillar of strength for w[omen in the field of
computing and technology, founding several important communities and
organizations that would change the lives of many women in the field,
bringing them closer together to share their accomplishments, ideas,
fears and successes as women working in and with technology.

Borg founded the Systers online community in 1987\. In 1994, Anita
co-founded the Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing. In 1997,
she founded the Institute for Women and Technology. Anita Borg died of
brain cancer in 2003\. After her death, the Institute was renamed the
Anita Borg Institute for Women and Technology.

In this interview, Borg talks about her childhood, her parents'
influence on her views on life and success, her college years, and how
she got involved in the field of data processing and computing. Borg
discusses the founding of Systers and the Grace Hopper Celebration of
Women in Computing. She also reflects on her career, sharing her opinion
on women in computing.

## About the Interview

ANITA BORG: An Interview Conducted by Janet Abbate for the IEEE History
Center, 5 January 2001

Interview \# 580 for the IEEE History Center, The Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.

## Copyright Statement

This manuscript is being made available for research purposes only. All
literary rights in the manuscript, including the right to publish, are
reserved to the IEEE History Center. No part of the manuscript may be
quoted for publication without the written permission of the Director of
IEEE History Center.

Request for permission to quote for publication should be addressed to
the IEEE History Center Oral History Program, [IEEE History Center at
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ
07030 USA or ieee-history@ieee.org. It should include identification of
the specific passages to be quoted, antici](@yzwcynshtxpry ^guqssdugeh ^odydkpebbvxm)pated use of the passages, and
identification of the user.

It is recommended that this oral history be cited as follows:

Anita Borg, an oral history conducted in 2001 by Janet Abbate, IEEE
History Center, Hoboken, NJ, USA.

## Interview

INTERVIEW: Anita Borg\
INTERVIEWER: Janet Abbate\
DATE: 5 Januar[y 2001\
PLACE: Palo Alto[, CA

### Growing Up and Moving All Over the US

**Abbate:**

I’ll start with your family background. You were born in 1949 in
Chicago?

**Borg:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

Did you grow up there?

**Borg:**

Outside of Chicago. We moved when I was about one year old, to Palatine.
At that time it was a small town, with both farms and commuters, about
35 miles outside of the city. My Dad commuted into the city. Now it’s
part of Chicago. But we lived outside of the town in a little area, so
it was very neat; it felt like living in the country. There were farms
around, and lots of cornfields, ](@srjixuwki)and a racehorse farm. We could run
around loose, so we loved it.

We were there till I was twelve, although we took a year off in
1959-1960\. We camped across the country and then lived in Hawaii for a
year. I went t]($bfikeyppqbfwu)o fifth grade in a bizarre place in Hawaii: having grown
up in a place that was entirely white, in the middle of Illinois, we
went to a working-class school on the windward side of Oahu that had
every race you could imagine. It was quite an eye-opening situation for
me and for my family[. In order to get us back to Chicago, my
grandparents bribed my folks and said, “If you come back, we’ll treat
you to two months in Europe in the summer.” So they pulled us out of
school early, and we went to Europe for a couple of months, and then
came back to the Chicago area. That lasted for a couple of years—because
once we’d done that, there was no way my parents wanted to live in
Illinois anymore, and we wound up moving to Washington state. One winter
my Dad just got in the car and drove to the west coast. The plan was for
him to start from Vancouver, go south, and find us a place to live. He
got as far as Mukilteo, Washington, which is about 25 miles north of
Seattle, and loved it. He called Mom and said, “Put the house on the
market; I bought one.” As soon as school was out, we mov[ed. We were an
adventurous family.

**Abbate:**

Sounds like it\! Now, what did your paren](^guqssdugeh $ygimxtobw)ts do for a living?

**Borg:**

Mom was a housewife until we got out to Washington, and then she worked
for Boeing for a while. Dad did a variety of different things. He
started out as](@eskiqvkbbxa $wxpblndpjh @yzwcynshtxpry $bfikeyppqbfwu) a salesman for a family company, the Fredrick Post
Company, which was a company that sold drafting materials; he worked for
them for a while. Then he sold furniture and school furniture in
Illinois. In Hawaii he was a used car salesman, which was hysterical—he
just never matched the image—he probably gave cars away to people\! When
we moved to the west coast, to Washington, he started learning how to
build houses. He built us a house, and then we moved in and he sold the
last one, and then he built another one and we moved in. He was
semi-retired, but doing things with investing. They lived fairly
frugally, and had a ball.

**Abbate:**

How big was your family?

**Borg:**

I have on[e sister.

They really had a good time. Their attitude about life was always that
you should have a good time. My mother’s parents thought my father was a
bum, and they just didn’t understand. They h[ad come through the
Depression, and you were supposed to work hard\! But my sister and I
feel absolutely blessed that we had parents that way. We both went in
really different directions, but we both wound up really adventurous
about what we did. They taught us that we could do anything we wanted,
and if we failed, well, what the heck? Y[ou try something else. And that
was always the attitude that they had. They never pushed us into
anything in particular, but told us if you want to do it, try it; what
the heck.

**Abbate:**

You had mentioned in another interview that your mother taught you to
love math, or that math was fun. How did she do that? Was she involved
in math?

**Borg:**

Not particularly. It was kind of subtle, it was one of these things
where I just remember that when I’d come up to her with homework, she
would be curious about it. It was clear that she hit a problem when she
got to calculus, but by the time I got there, enjoying math wasn’t an
issue for me. She liked the idea of puzzles, and I got that from her:
that math was just fun puzzles. So when she was trying to help me with
homework (which seems to be different from the way homework goes today),
there was no sense of fear of it that got across. So that was really
nice. I very much appreciate that from her.

**Abbate:**

You were always interested in math and science as a kid?

**Borg:**

Well, yes, the math in particular. I was interested in lots of things. I
think by the time I was in high school, I had actually had a couple of
bad experiences with the English end of my classes, and so that bad
experience probably nudged me more towards the math and science.

### College Years

**Abbate:**

Interesting. When did you first use a computer? Was there some point
before college?

**Borg:**

No. Never in college, either.

**Abbate:**

Never in college?

**Borg:**

Well, that’s not true. Not in my first two years of college. And then I
quit college for a couple of years.

**Abbate:**

So the first two years were at the University of Washington?

**Borg:**

Right.

**Abbate:**

That was 1967–1969, something like that?

**Borg:**

Right.

**Abbate:**

So you weren’t majoring in computer science?

**Borg:**

I didn’t declare a major. I think you had to declare one by your junior
year, and I kept going to whatever advisor had to sign, and I’d be
signing up for the next advanced math courses, and I remember the
advisor saying, “Why don’t you just go to the math advisor?” And I’d
say, “Well, I don’t know what I want to major in. I’m not sure yet.”
He’d say, “I don’t know anything about these math courses,” and I’d
say, “I know what I should take; it says in the book.” And he’d say,
“Oh, all right,” and he’d sign up for me.

### Stepping into the Data Processing Field

**Borg:**

At that time I was m](@srjixuwki)arried—I got married much too young—and my husband
was two years older. He graduated from college and went to New York to
graduate school. I quit school and was going to—in those days, you know:
work and put hubby through graduate school. I didn’t know what I was
going to do. What kind of job could I get without a degree or anything?
A friend of mine said, “Get into data processing\!” \[Thoughtfully\]:
“Data processing? O.K.”

When I got to New York, I was so incredibly naive, it was just amazing.
I didn’t know how to look for a job. So I looked in the newspapers. It
was still in the days when the ads were separated: jobs for men, jobs
for women.

**Abbate:**

Really.

**Borg:**

Yes. I don’t know how much longer that lasted; not that long. I found a
bunch of jobs, and I wrote letters—hand-written letters\! I d[idn’t know
you were supposed to type these things, I didn’t know that there was a
form for these things; it was like a hand-written letter from a
high-school kid looking for a job. When I think back, I can’t even
imagine what it would be like to get one of those \[as an employer\]. If
I got one of those I might have to call the person in, just because it
reminded me of me\!

The first job I got was some kind of job where they were going to train
me to do [Fortran](/FORTRAN "FORTRAN"), and I was going to do something
for them. I took the Fortran class, and then over the long weekend I
went to Woodstock. When I came back, I got sick as a dog and turned out
to have mono; I was sick for six weeks and lost the job.

The next job was “girl Friday” for the data processing department of a
small insurance company. I took the job because they promised that they
would teach me programming and eventually I would become a
programmer—which I didn’t. I did a bunch of programming work, but I
was still categorized as a clerk and paid as a clerk. About that time I
got divorced, and I quit and went back to school. But while I was there,
I got hold of some COBOL Program Instruction manuals. They were like
what you get on a computer now \[for instructional software\]: “Answer
these questions. If you get the answer right, go to pag[e this; if you
got it wrong, go to page whatever.” So I taught myself basic COBOL and
started doing some programming, and then they put me to work, having
taught myself this language. It was funny: I did a project, and they
were complaining because it took so long; it took twice as long as they
expected it to take. Now I know that only twice as long as what I said I
thought it would take was a miracle, given that I’d never done anything
like this before\!

### Going Back to School-PhD work at NYU

Then I went back to school. I had been accepted to NYU originally when I
was coming to New York, but we’d decided that we couldn’t afford it.
\[This time\] I wound up with scholarsh[ips. I went back and decided to
major in computer science, because I wasn’t ever going to depend on
anybody else to support me again. It wasn’t clear to me that math was a
major that was going to give me a way to support myself, but computer
science was. As it turns out, I wound up with a Ph.D. in computer
science, but essentially a Masters in mathematics along the wa]($ygimxtobw @yzwcynshtxpry ^odydkpebbvxm $bfikeyppqbfwu)y.

**Abbate:**

There must have been a lot of overlap between the two majors.

**Borg:**

Yes. Particularly at NYU, because at NYU they just had a new computer
science department that had grown out of the math department. The way it
was set up in the graduate department, if your area was a systems area,
in order to balance it you had to take all this th]($bfikeyppqbfwu @gmcasjsahjq)eory stuff. Well, most
of it was mathematics, so I took logic and automata theory and
probability; so more than half of the courses that I was taking were
math.

**Abbate:**

And you went directly from the undergraduate degree to the graduate
program at NYU?

**Borg:**

Yes. I hadn’t actually intended to do this. I’m not sure that the
professor who got me into graduate school knew what my plan was. My
actual plan was to finish my undergrad degree. At that time I was living
with a lawyer, and our plan was: we were going to hop in our van with
our two big motorcycles, and we were going to move to Oregon. He was
going to be a hippie lawyer, and I was going to be a hippie programmer,
and we were going to have hippie babies and grow pot in the backyard.

**Abbate:**

That’s a great image\!

**Borg:**

But I ](@yzwcynshtxpry)figured, what the heck, I’ll throw in one application for graduate
school. I was totally test-phobic: I didn’t want to take the GRE. I
think about it now, and it’s such a shame, because what could I lose? I
probably would have done great, and I certainly would advise anyone who
was afraid of it to just take it, but I didn’t. But at NYU, because I
had been there, I didn’t have to take it. So I threw it in. I applied
for the master’s program, but I applied for financial aid, and Martin
Davis, who was a wonderful guy, called me in and said, “We don’t give
financial aid to master’s students. Had you thought at all of going for
a Ph.D.?” Because I had gotten rave reviews from my professors. Quick
thinking, I said, “Oh\! Well, actually, yes—sure\!” (Laughs.) And all
the way I’m thinking, “I’ll say anything to get them to pay for it.[ In a
year and a half I’ll have a master’s degree, then I’ll go to Oregon. I
think we can do that.”

They gave me full support, and once I was into it, I got hooked. It
slowly happened. I don’t know how long it was before I thought of myself
as a Ph.D. student; probably sometime in the second year. It wasn’t
necessarily a happy thought. It was interesting, it was challenging, but
I wasn’t sure that that was where I wanted to be until later. I was in
graduate school for eight years. They had a five-year fellowship and
then the money ran out. So at that point I wound up working full time
and finishing my thesis, so the last three years were very part-time
thesis work.

**Abbate:**

Were there a lot of other women in that program?

**Borg:**

A lot?

**Abbate:**

How would you characterize it?

**Borg:**

There were a few. My office mate was a woman. She didn’t finish. There
were a cluster of women who started in the years right around me, and I
think that was unusual. I think there were five or six of us that knew
each other well. I always felt weird. I always felt thought of as “not
serious” by the faculty. On the other hand, only part of it, I thought,
was because I was female, and part of it was because I had a very
different attitude about what I was doing from a lot of people. I was
told that I would never get a Ph.D. with my attitude. I had an attitude
sort of like my Dad’s attitude about life, which was: I told them really
clearly that graduate school was a five-days-a-week, eight-hours-a-day
job, and I was going to go have fun on the weekends. I was going to go
ride motorcycles, I was going to ](@eskiqvkbbxa ^ardilojhj)paddle kayaks, I was going to do all
the other stuff that I do. I had a relationship, I had a life. And who
knows—you could get run over by a truck, why should I wreck my life to
get a Ph.D.? The idea that you have to turn yourself into some sort of
graduate student all the time is, I think, very foolish. I think it’s[
foolish of departments and it’s foolish of students. Unfortunately, they
get stuck in a position where they don’t have a choice.

There was a professor who told me that I would never get a Ph.D. And I
said, “Yes, I will\! It may take me a long time, but I will get it.” And
it may be that I didn’t create the most fabulous thesis—although my
advisor thought it was pretty damn good. Unclear that the rest of the
department did, but . . . .

**Abbate:**

Your work was on operating systems?

**Borg:**

Yes.

**Abbate:**

How did you pick that?

**Borg:**

It was a winding course. Initially I was interested in languages and
compiling and AI, as they come together around languages for AI. But
there was only one professor there who was interested in anything
related to this, and he was doing automatic theorem proving, and I
wasn’t at all interested in what he had in mind. I did a little bit of
work with him on mec[hanisms for dealing with parallel languages, but he
really wasn’t following that, and I just didn’t want to work with him.

At that time a new young professor, Gerald Belpaire, showed up, who had
a much more interesting way of thinking about parallelism, and [we
started talking about that. He was interested in it in the context of
operating systems, so I got more interested in the topic. I didn’t know
anything about operating systems, and I never took an operating systems
course. He and I became very close friends and talked about all this
stuff together.

It was very disturbing, because he wound up not getting rehired. At that
time NYU had been a mill for new professors; they just hired people and
kicked them out: “Well, not that one. No, not that one . . . ” He had a
very different attitude from Jack Schwartz about operating systems, and
Jack had a much more powerful position. It’s funny: the night before, we
had gone out and had drunk a bottle of [champagne to celebrate that we
were going to work together. The next day, he got the letter saying that
he wasn’t going to be renewed. But we decided to go ahead, and I got
somebody else to act as my official advisor, and Gerald was the real
one.

My thesis was fairly theoretical; somewhere between practical and
]($ygimxtobw @yzwcynshtxpry $wxpblndpjh)theoretical work, trying to figure out how synchronization mechanisms
worked. I had never really looked at a real operating system, so it was
very theoretical in that sense. When I got out and got a job for a
startup actually building one, it was a whole different ballgame. Then I
learned about the real world. That’s where the real fun started.

### Working on Operating Systems at Auragen

**Abbate:**

That was Auragen?

**Borg:**

Auragen, yes.

**Abbate:**

Well, that sounds clearly related to your thesis work, because you were
building an operating system for Auragen.

**Borg:**

You bet.

**Abbate:**

What was that called? It eventually became a product, this operating
system?

**Borg:**

It eventually became a product for Nixdorf called TARGON. We were
creating a fault-tolerant operating system. The founder of Auragen
thought that it would be easy to create a cheaper computing system with
Tandems. We'd just use off-the-shelf parts—e.g., 68000 processors—rather
than custom hardware: quick and dirty. This was somebody who didn’t
understand that there was software involved\! But we had a really great
team. I think I was the eleventh person, and there were three of us
looking at software initially, and it was wonderful fun. We had some
really, really good ideas. The idea was to embed all the fault tolerance
in the operating system, so you could just run ordinary programs, and if
the hardware failed, you wouldn’t notice it. Your program didn’t have to
be programmed differently. And that was different from Tandem. We didn’t
really understand how hard what we were trying to do was. It was
brilliant. . . . Unfortunately, we didn’t understand very much about
startups, either.

**Abbate:**

Because this was only 1981 or so.

**Borg:**

We didn’t know anything. If we’d had a little more time, it would have
been great. As it was, it was good.

When the company went down the tubes, Nixdorf stepped in. It had been an
investor and had the right to the technology; they had done some
parallel development along the way. I was the only person that they
hired from Auragen to come to Germany for a year and help them finish up
the fault-tolerance part, because that had been the piece that was my
baby. It was all sorts of things: it was a multi-processor system, it
used message passing, it was fault tolerant—everything that people gave
fancy names to later. We didn’t know nobody had ever invented these
things. We didn’t know what we were inventing. It just seemed like the
right thing to do.

### Presenting at the Association for Computing Machinery Conference

I was the only person who got a[ paper out of it, which turned out to be
the best thing that ever happened to my career. The SOSP (Symposium on
Operating System Principles) was coming up, and I thought, “Well, what
the heck?” I whipped up a quickie little paper, which was really a
terrible little paper. This was still while I was with Auragen.

**Abbate:**

The SOSP was put on by the ACM \[Association for Computing Machinery\]?

**Borg:**

It’s a conference done by the ACM, and it was the top operating systems
conference. I didn’t really know that, I just—well, maybe I did know
that. I threw in the paper. (The company knew so little, they didn’t
know that they shouldn’t even let me write a paper about what we were
doing, because most sta[rtups would never let you ](^odydkpebbvxm)write this kind of
stuff.) I got a letter back from Jim Gray, I think, or maybe it was Al
Specter—one of the greats—sayi](@srjixuwki ^odydkpebbvxm @srjixuwki)ng, “Well, we see that the ideas are
great, but the paper really needs work, so we’re going to give you a
shepherd to help you put together[ a good paper.” I worked really hard on
this paper and created a good paper. I was told later that if the final
paper had been the original paper, it would have been a candidate for
one of the best papers in the conference. I’d never given a paper
before; I’d never even given a talk before; and I gave a stunning paper,
a stunning talk, to three hundred of the top people in operating
systems. Suddenly I was on the map.

That was 1983\. In 1985 I went to Germany, and when I came back, I went
to a conference in Asilomar, California and met a bunch of people who
were doing fault-tolerant stuff. After a year in Germany in the rain, I
was in Asilomar in March, and I was walking on the beach with famous
computer scientists in the sun, thinking, “I have to move to
California\!” I wandered around saying, “I need [a job” and wound up
getting a job with DEC, at the Western Research Lab. So doing that work,
writing that paper. . . I had never really thought about what I was
going to do, I never had a plan for my career: things just kind of
happened. It feels that way, anyway.

### Working at Digital Equipment Corporation

**Abbate:**

So you ended up at DEC, and you were working on performance analysis of
memory systems. Can you explain what that is?

**Borg:**

Well, initially I was hired there to work on operating systems. But the
multiprocessor that we were building was just not far out, so we
cancelled it. So I was out of a project, wandering around talking to
people, trying to figure out what to do. The work I ended up doing came
out of an elevator conversation with my boss. We were going to be
working on a single-processor machine, and there was no need for the
[kind of work that I had been doing. But it was going to be extremely
fast, and it was going to need multi[ple levels of caches. The question
was, how should those caches be structured? The idea is that you have
different levels of memories: the closer they are to the processor, the
faster they are and the more expensive they are, while plain old memory
is far away and slow. So how do you structure them, and how fast are
they? You can't build a whole bunch \[of the fastest caches\], because
it is too expensive.

The way they’d figured this out in the past was to simulat[e it. The
problem was that the huge caches we could build could hold much more
data than was available \[for simulation tests\]. At that time they just
tacked small data sets together to get a lot of data, but the result did
not represent reality. In addition, the current data collection
mechanisms didn't allow us to get full data for ]($bfikeyppqbfwu)multiple programs
simultaneously running.

David Wall and I came up with a way of collecting real traces from real,
big programs that were hugely bigger than anybody else had done before.
We figured out a way to collect the traces; then stop that and bring in
the program that would simulate the cache, without disturbing what we
were collecting before; and then trace again for a while. Which may not
seem weird—but it’s extremely difficult, because you’re running](@srjixuwki $ygimxtobw) a test
program and paying attention to what the state of the memory is, and
then you toss it out and use the memory to run something else (the
simulator), and then you bring the test program back in again. The
longest traces that anybody had ever worked with before were maybe a
million memory references, and that was considered long. We simulated
traces of ten billion references, but could simulate till the cows came
home\! We could run an arbitrarily complex set of r](^odydkpebbvxm)eal programs and get
all the memory references. The next plan was to bring the operating
system references in. I had that designed and turned it over to a
wonderful graduate student, Brad Chen, who did his Ph.D. on it at CMU
\[Carnegie Mellon University\].

At that point I was getting interested in building Mecca for Systers.

### Creating Systers

**Abbate:**

Can you explain what Mecca is?

**Borg:**

Well, it’s old, at this point. At that point, the email system for
Systers—you have to remember that this is pre-Web—

**Abbat[e:**

Let’s back up a little. You created Systers in 1987 as a mailing list
for women computer professionals.

**Borg:**

Right. At that point it started out just for women in operating systems
research.

**Abbate:**

Hence the name “Systers.”

**Borg:**

Right. Then it was women in computing research, and it just expanded and
expanded, and it eventually got to be women in computing.

**Abbate:**

Why did you start that?

**Borg:**

Have you heard the bathroom story?

**Abbate:**

I don’t think I have.

**Borg:**

(Laughs.) I’ve told it so many times, I’m surprised that nobody’s heard
it. I was at SOSP in Austin in 1987\. I always look at the list of
attendees to see how many women are there. Of four hundred attendees,
there were only about thirty women. I ran into a friend of mine in the
bathroom. We began talking about why there were so few women. Each time
someone came in, she joined the conversation. It’s a little bathroom
with only two stalls, and we wound up with about eight of the women from
the conference crammed in there, talking about it\! We said, “You know,
we should meet somewhere else. Why don’t we try to get all the women at
the conference to come to dinner together?” We decided to wander around
and find every woman and tell her to come to dinner a little bit early;
we would take over t]($wxpblndpjh $wxpblndpjh)wo tables and meet each other. We got, I think, all
but two of the women, and it was great. Anita Jones, Barbara Liskov were
there; everything from graduate students, to me in the middle, to these
senior women. It was so extraordinary that I collected their email
addresses (for those who had it—not everybody had email at that point,
or some had email, but it was just inside their companies) and set up a
mailing list and came up with this funny little name.

We didn’t really have a sense of how to use it, so I would try to keep
it going. I’d ask some question, or encourag[e a question to be asked.
Then a few friends of mine who weren’t in operating systems—Barbara
Simons and I don’t remember who else; other women in research—said, “Why
operating systems? Y[ou don’t just talk about operating systems, do you?”
So I said, “No. OK, we’ll open it.” It grew step by step as women asked
to join. They needed it; they needed the connection. It is now limited
to "technical women in computing."

I think the most extraordinary time for ]($wxpblndpjh $bfikeyppqbfwu)us, in a way, was probably whe[n
it was about a few hundred people. It was more of a little community. On
the other hand, it was clear that opening it up wider has done something
incredible for women in the field. Before Systers existed, there was no
community of women in computing. It didn’t exist. We all existed as
individuals: we had a few women that we knew, but there was no
community. There was no notion of how many women were out there, doing
what.

Systers has changed considerably. A lot of the women who were there
initially have moved off, because there are too many people there, and
it’s hard to manage right now. There’s now a project to revamp Mecca,
because Mecca just doesn’t serve the needs. In fact, it acts just about
like an email list right now, because the things that I built didn’t get
carried on to the state they s[hould be.

### Developing Mecca

**Abbate:**

And Mecca, you developed that at DEC?

**Borg:**

Yes. I had a bunch of ideas about the way email should work, and I
assumed (since I didn’t know anything about how email worked) that
somebody must have done it, because it was so obvious. And then I asked
around, and it turned out no, nobody had done this; nobody has still
done this. The idea was that everybody could have a profile about
themselves. On the basis of the profiles, you could send mail to
everybody who was in the operating systems field, or who was at a
particular place, by just putting ](@gmcasjsahjq $wxpblndpjh)a head[er in your email. You could
filter your mail—not at your site, but at the local center. That was
really important to me. We had people on all sorts of systems; we had
people who had very poor connections, who had just occasional
connections, who had to be able to filter their mail, who couldn’t get
all that mail; and it was really important to serve them well, and not
to overwhelm them; to allow them to be part of the commu]($bfikeyppqbfwu)nity without
getting gobs of mail. If they wanted to go look at the mail, they could
look at it somewhere else, and just get the kind that they wanted. So I
was trying to build a system that served a very broad group. Most of the
email systems that were being built at that time were built to serve
people inside a company, where everyone had the same kind of base
systems.

I thought it was really great—remember, this was before the Web.
Unfortunately, I wound up not getting the kind of support I needed from
my management. It was a very difficult situation where I was being told
that I was getting the support, but I wasn’t. If I had been told that I
wasn’t getting the support, I could have worked it differently. But it
was an unpleasant situation for a while.

### Hitting the Glass Ceiling and Leaving DEC

**Abb]($wxpblndpjh @gmcasjsahjq)ate:**

So is that why you decided to leave DEC?

**Borg:**

Eventually. That was one of the reasons that I left that particular lab.
It was a couple more years before I left DEC. I sometimes am amazed that
I stuck it out as long as I did. Because after that, I hit a glass
ceiling. I had helped put together a group to work on a new project.
Mecca was working, it was OK; I was trying to get some o](@eskiqvkbbxa ^odydkpebbvxm $bfikeyppqbfwu @gmcasjsahjq ^ardilojhj)ther people to
get involved in holding it together, doing a little work on it on the
side, because I had wanted to turn it into a product; but that didn’t
happen. So then I went off to do this other thing, which had been
someb](@srjixuwki)ody else’s idea, but he said he didn’t really want to drive it, and
I got it. I loved it, and ]($ygimxtobw)I pulled together a team of people—who never
would have worked together before—and talked to the product groups,
talked to all these people, got everybody excited. They were charged,
they really wanted to do it.

Then the head of Research calle]($bfikeyppqbfwu $bfikeyppqbfwu)d me in and let me know that they
actually needed somebody older—with gray hair, who was male—to run it.
The person he had in mind actually didn’t really want to; he was the guy
who had the original idea. It wound up ending the project—which should
have been handled completely differently, even if the company didn’t
want to build it at that time. I probably could have fought it, but
what’s the purpose of doing something like this unless you have the
full support of the people around you? It never would have worked.
Anyway, I felt like I had my breath kicked out of me.

**Abbate:**

Was that the first real encounter with gender discrimination you had
had?

**Borg:**

Yes, it was the first time that it really felt like that to me. I’m sure
they didn’t see it that way. They just thought that I didn’t have enough
experience. And yet I think that if a man with my experience had been i[n
that position, it would have been entirely different. But having just
had the breath kicked out of me, I couldn’t even say that to
them.

### Ideas abou[t Women in Technology, Founding the Institute for Women and Technology

So then I went off and spent a year or so building a project called the
Diversity Collection. I decided to go off and work entirely on
technology for women’s stuff. I was working with Judith Klavans at
Columbia University, and we were trying to get six million dollars from
NSF to build an extraordinary, Web-based database of every program in
the country dealing with trying to get women and minorities into
science, engineering, and technology. It was going to be Web-based.

We didn’t get the money, but at about the time I heard that hadn’t
worked, I read this incredible book called The Futures of Women by
Pamela McCorduck and Nancy Ramsey, and that changed my life. It looks at
four scenarios for the future. What it did for me was to make me realize
that when we think about getting w[omen into computing, we’re only
looking at half of the picture. We’re not really looking at the other
half, which is: What do women—all women—want and bring to technology?
What should we be creating; how do we bring those two sides together?
With the help of Barbara Fittipaldi and the Kellogg Foundation, I put
together a meeting at Princeton. There were a dozen women, and I said,
“Read this book, and let’s come together and j](^guqssdugeh)ust talk about it.”
There was Carol Realini, who has now founded a number of successful
companies; Barbara Simons was there; Judith Klavans was there, I think;
I can’t remember who everyone else was. I came out of it with a
title—“The Institute for Women a[nd Technology”—and I knew that it
had something to do with both sides of this issue: getting women into
computing and what’s being created. The two have to go toget[her.

**Abbate:**

So the point is to have women give input into the design of computer
products?

**Borg:**

Yes. And that women do something different \[with technology\]. It’s not
just the women who are creating it, the computer professionals; it’s all
the other women, and we have to think about how the technology impacts
women.

That was in about February of 1997\. At that point I realized that what
I wanted to do was create this institute. It was pretty clear that
Digital had no interest in supporting this. I talked to John White, who
at that time was heading up CSL \[the Computer Science Laboratory\] here
at [Xerox
PARC](/Xerox_Palo_Alto_Research_Center_\(PARC\) "Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC)");
he’s now the executive director at ACM, and I’d known him for years
through ACM; and Mark Weiser, who was the Chief Technologist for PARC,
and he was a friend of mine as well. They “got” this idea, and got me in
to talk to John Seely Brown, who headed up PARC. I must have talked to
him in early summer, late spring, a](^guqssdugeh @eskiqvkbbxa @yzwcynshtxpry $ygimxtobw $ygimxtobw)nd it took about six months to get
PARC to agree that this was some kind of reasonable thing, to hire me to
do this.

**Abbate:**

It seems like you have funding for the Institute from a lot of different
computer companies. Did they come on board right away? Was it obvious to
them that this was a good idea?

**Borg:**

(Laughs.) Oh, no. With the exception of HP \[Hewlett-Packard\], every
dime has been difficult. There’s usually been somebody who gets it, but
figuring out which pot the money can come from is hard. HP has been
extraordinary, first because of the people that we got hooked up with—

\[Interruption.\]

HP has been a very, very strong supporter from early on. But it’s been
very hard. There’s a great woman at HP, Nancy Levitt, who just got it
immediately and has been an incredible supporter all the way along. She
has helped us design our programs; she’s part of us. And that’s been
fabulous. I thin](^ardilojhj)k it’s going to be easier and easier, as we have
existing programs that we can show people. But as we were trying to
figure out what it was we were doing, the story was hard. \[As if
talking to potential sponsor:\] “We have this thing that we think we
want to create.”

\[Speaking as potential sponsor:\] “Well, what is it that you’re doing?”

“Well, I don’t know exactly what I think I’m doing. I mean, I know what
I’m doing, but I don’t know exactly how. Just give me some money, and
we’ll be able to do it\!” (Laughs.)

But now we’re starting to make some really significant progress, and
that’s very, very exciting. It’s particularly exciting for me right now,
being in my current health situation, knowing that I have people in
place who “get it,” an advisory board and a board of trustees who can
carry it forward. Hopefully I’ll be around to carry it forward, too, but
I don’t know if that’s the case.

### Founding the Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing

**Abbate:**

Now, you also co-founded the Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in
Computing in 1994, I guess while you were still at DEC. That was with
Telle Whitney?

**Borg:**

Telle, yes.

**Abbate:**

How did that happen?

**Borg:**

The initial idea came from a lunch with Marlene McDaniel, who is the CEO
of Women.com. I’ve known Marlene since I first moved to California. She
was working for a company that was doing commercial conferences, some of
the really big trade conferences, and she said, “](@gmcasjsahjq @gmcasjsahjq)Anita, you’ve got this
group of all these women on Systers. You should start a conference and
make some money.” The whole idea of making money off all these women
didn't appeal to me, but the idea of a conference was pretty
interesting. I thought, First of all, wouldn’t it be fun to get them all
together and meet them? It would make such an even better experience for
the community to get together. Then the question was, What kind of a
conference could we have where somebody’s boss would pay for them to
go—where you could use money that wasn’t out of your own pocket to go
to this conference? And we thought: a technical conference. Wouldn’t
that be extraordinary, for women to get [together and hear what everybody
else is doing? So there were all these possibilities. One was, what
would a technical conference that was almost all female be like? Would
it be the same? I don’t think so\! I think it would be wildly different.

So we planned, as close as we could, a top-notch technical conference.
We figured that we could probably get a couple hundred women. We hoped
that we could get a couple hundred women. I called up famous women I
knew, and I got Anita Jones, Fran Allen, Barbara Liskov. When I got
those three to say that they would agree to be keynote or plenary
speakers, I had it. Then I got money, and I got other speakers, and I
got people to come.

I didn’t know exactly what we were going to get. It was really amazing.
Some of our principles were: This was not going to be a half-assed
conference. I’ve been [to lots of get-togethers about women, and it’s
always on the cheap. This was not going to be on the cheap. This was
going to be at a good place. It was going to be as high-class as SOSP or
any other really good computer science conference: at a nice hotel,
really well done. We figured we could do that if we raised fifty or a
hundred thousand dollars. We raised two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars\! We had room for four hundred people: we squeezed in four
hundred fifty, and we had to turn away a hundred people. This was in
Washington. It was extraor[dinary; it was absolutely extraordinary, and I
am wildly, wildly proud of that, because a lot of people said it
wouldn’t happen.

I’m sorry that very few men have attended. We hoped that it would be
about ten percent men, but they don’t come. But we’ve gotten a fair
number of the very senior men to come—and then they get it, then they
understand that it’s different. I remember at the first conference
hearing [Ruzena Bajcsy](/Ruzena_Bajcsy "Ruzena Bajcsy") walking along
the hall, kind of mumbling under her breath, saying, “It’s so amazing\!
There’s no ego\!” And it really, really is different. Women are there to
share what they’re learning, not to beat their chests and puff up and
brag about what they’re doing. They really want to share it and
understand in a very, very different way. And as a result, the students
learn that there’s an entirely different way of interacting. So even
though they go to these other conferences, and they know that it’s
rough, they see that it’s not the only way things can go. They can go to
the Grace Hopper Celebration and get some strength and really make a
connection with people to work with. And that has happened. It’s really
great. It’s really wonderful.

**Abbate:**

It sounds great.

**Borg:**

It is wonderful.

### Reflecting on Career, Women in Compu[ting

**Abbate:**

I’ll ask you a few general questions about computing in general and
issues for women. What would you say is the most satisfying aspect, for
you, of working with computers?

**Borg:**

I always loved the challenge of solving a problem, initially; although
later it became more and more important for it to have some use—some
important use. But initially it really was the fun of solving the
problem. In graduate school, I actually didn’t really enjoy it very
much; I didn’t enjoy my thesis work very much. When I got into the
startup, I had a great time, because building the system and getting it
to work was just this great, great challenge. Figuring out the
problem—that was the piece that was fun; and then building it, and
making it work—especially if we thought it was something that no one
else had ever done. That was fun. It was fun with the performance
analysis stuff—although, to be perfectly honest, I didn’t really care
about the analysis at all. I was making the system work so that we
generated the data that somebody else could analyze. It was the building
of it that was fun for me. And then with Mecca: again, it was figuring
out what was going to serve those people, figuring out how to build it,
and then building it. That was the fun part.

**Abbate:**

Do you have any advice ](@eskiqvkbbxa $wxpblndpjh @gmcasjsahjq)for young women who are thinking of going into
computing today?

**Borg:**

Hmm](^odydkpebbvxm), I always used to\! I think that it’s important not to pay too much
attention to the stereotype that you somehow have to be one of these
geeky guys, which is completely ridiculous. Not everybody’s like that;
most people aren’t like that. Most of the places that I’ve worked in
certainly have had some, but you can be anybody you want and enjoy the
work. If you like it, there are people whom you’ll find who can]($ygimxtobw ^guqssdugeh @eskiqvkbbxa ^odydkpebbvxm) share
that enjoyment. The stereotype is just a stereotype, it’s not reality;
and you shouldn’t let that hinder you.

It’s not always going to be easy. But if you enjoy it, there’s a whole
lot of fun; there’s a whole lot of pleasure. And there are great things
to be done. It’s hard, sometimes, to see: the way computing and
technology are often taught, we lose the connection with the impact of
what we’re creating. It’s a really good idea to think about all the
incredible things that could be done with all of this, if you care about
that; because sometimes people won’t talk about it, and it’s really
important. And if that will carry you through, then hang on to it.

**Abbate:**

Great. Thanks very much.

Retrieved from
"<http://ethw.org/index.php?title=Oral-History:Anita_Borg&oldid=108225>"

[Categories](/Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

* [Computing and
  electronics](/Category:Computing_and_electronics "Category:Computing and electronics")
* [Engineering and
  society](/Category:Engineering_and_society "Category:Engineering and society")
* [Profession](/Category:Profession "Category:Profession")
* [Engineering
  fundamentals](/Category:Engineering_fundamentals "Category:Engineering fundamentals")
* [People and
  organizations](/Category:People_and_organizations "Category:People and organizations")

## Contents

* [1 About Anita Borg](#About_Anita_Borg)
* [2 About the Interview](#About_the_Interview)
* [3 Copyright Statement](#Copyright_Statement)
* [4 Interview](#Interview)
  * [4\.1 Growing Up and Moving All Over the
    US](#Growing_Up_and_Moving_All_Over_the_US)
  * [4\.2 College Years](#College_Years)
  * [4\.3 Stepping into the Data Processing
    Field](#Stepping_into_the_Data_Processing_Field)
  * [4\.4 Going Back to School-PhD work at
    NYU](#Going_Back_to_School-PhD_work_at_NYU)
  * [4\.5 Working on Operating Systems at
    Auragen](#Working_on_Operating_Systems_at_Auragen)
  * [4\.6 Presenting at the Association for Computing Machinery
  ](^ardilojhj $ygimxtobw @gmcasjsahjq)  Conference](#Presenting_at_the_Association_for_Computing_Machinery_Conference)
  * [4\.7 Working at Digital Equipment
    Corporation](#Working_at_Digital_Equipment_Corporation)
  * [4\.8 Creating Systers](#Creating_Systers)
  * [4\.9 Developing Mecca](#Developing_Mecca)
  * [4\.10 Hitting the Glass Ceiling and Leaving
    DEC](#Hitting_the_Glass_Ceiling_and_Leaving_DEC)
  * [4\.11 Ideas about Women in T]($ygimxtobw)echnology, Founding the Institute for
    Women and
    Technology](#Ideas_about_Women_in_Technol]($ygimxtobw $ygimxtobw)ogy.2C_Founding_the_Institute_for_Women_and_Technology)
  * [4\.12 Founding the Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in
    Computing](#Founding_the_Grace_Hopper_Celebration_of_Women_in_Computing)
  * [4\.13 Reflecting on Career, Wo](^ardilojhj $ygimxtobw)men in
    Computing](#Reflecting_on_Career.2C_Women_in_Computing)

[![Powered by
MediaWiki](/resources/assets/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)](//www.mediawiki.org/)
[![Powered by Semantic
MediaWiki](/extensions/SemanticMediaWiki/includes/../resources/images/smw_button.png)](https://www.semantic-mediawiki.org/wiki/Semantic_MediaWiki)

* This page was last modified on 21 Novembe](@srjixuwki)r](@yzwcynshtxpry $bfikeyppqbfwu) 2014, at 10:41\.

* This page has been accessed 6,197 times.

* [Abou](@yzwcynshtxpry)t ETHW](/ETHW:About "ETHW:About")

* [Policies and disclaimers](/ETHW:Policies "](@yzwcynshtxpry)ETHW:Policies")
